<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Amusement: A Force in Christian Training</title>
      <author><name reg="Vincent, Marvin R.">Rev. Marvin R. Vincent.</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 8, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">25018</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-04-08">April 8,  2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
            Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;. (This file was produced from scans
            of public domain works at the University of Michigan's Making of
            America collection.)
            Page-images available at
            &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID450819930498e/&gt;
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center; bold">Amusement: A Force in Christian Training</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Rev. Marvin R. Vincent</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Pastor of the First Presbyterian Church, Troy, N.Y.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Wm. H. Young, 8 &amp; 9 First Street</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Troy, N.Y.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">1867</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
  </front>
<body>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
These discourses are not presented as a series. With
the exception of the last, which was prepared merely for
publication, they were delivered at considerable intervals,
and to meet certain aspects of the subject as they presented
themselves. As they all develop substantially the same
principles, they will probably contain some repetitions.
The interest awakened by the publication of the essay
before the Albany Convention, and the very general desire
expressed to see the second and third of these discourses in
print, have decided the author against remoulding the
whole into one treatise which he at one time contemplated.
He therefore sends them forth in their original shape,
with earnest prayer that the great Head of the church
may use them, with all their imperfections, to awaken
Christian thought and friendly discussion on a subject of
vital importance to the welfare of our youth.
</p>

<p>
Marvin R. Vincent.
</p>

<p>
Troy, <hi rend='italic'>Jan. 9th, 1867</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Religion And Amusement.</head>
<head type="sub">An Essay, Delivered at the International Convention of
Young Men's Christian Associations,</head>
<head type="sub">Held In Albany, June 1, 1866.</head>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
The religious thought of the age must soon
face this subject more fairly than it has yet done;
and seek for some more satisfactory adjustment
of it. At present its status is very indefinite.
The church is by no means at one concerning it.
The pulpit too often evades it. Private Christians
waver between the results of independent
thought and of early education, undecided whether
to approve or condemn; while extremists take
advantage of this hesitation to lay down the
sternest dogmas, and to thunder denunciations
at every head that will not bow to their <hi rend='italic'>ipse dixit</hi>.
The questions at issue are not to be dismissed
with a sneer at fanaticism and over-scrupulousness
on the one hand, and with a protest against
unwarrantable liberality on the other. The whole
subject must be reëxamined with reference to
fundamental gospel principles by both parties, in
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
a spirit of Christian moderation, and with the
desire of ascertaining not only what is <emph>safe</emph>, but
what is <emph>right</emph>.
</p>

<p>
To prosecute thoroughly such an examination
within the limits assigned me, is, of course, impossible.
I can only deal with a few of the great
principles underlying the case, and urge their
application to a single practical question which
has arisen in the experience of our own, and it
may be, of other Christian associations.
</p>

<p>
The idea of <emph>development</emph>, which is perhaps the
fundamental one of Christianity, has been to a
very great extent swallowed up in the idea of
<emph>safety</emph>. It is not an uncommon error to regard
Christianity almost exclusively in a defensive
aspect; the Christian merely as a <emph>safe</emph> man, protected
by Divine safe-guards from temptation,
rescued by Divine mercy from the terrors of
death and judgment. Correspondingly with this
mistake, the tendency has grown to strengthen
the defenses of character, rather than to foster
its growth. To keep it from temptation, rather
than to teach it to overcome temptation. To
teach it its danger from the world, rather than
its duty to the world. Consequently we have
heard more about keeping unspotted from the
world, than of going into <emph>all</emph> the world, and
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
preaching the gospel to every creature. More
about coming out and being separate, than of
knowing the truth which shall make free. More
of separating wheat from tares, than of leavening
lumps.
</p>

<p>
The false instinct of self-preservation, which
sent the Romanist into cloisters and convents,
and tore him from the sweet sanctities of domestic
life, has perpetuated itself more than some of
us think in Protestant thought and church legislation.
And in nothing has this tendency revealed
itself more distinctly than in the matter of
amusements. For amusement, having the effect
to make men feel kindly toward the world, and,
more readily than duty, falling in with human
inclination, has been regarded as unsafe, and
therefore as a thing to be kept at arm's length
by the church, and admitted to her folds only
under the strictest surveillance, and in gyves
and handcuffs.
</p>

<p>
The developments of this spirit are so familiar
that I need not stop to enumerate them. The
important thing now is to discover the right
stand-point for discussion. And here let me say
what, until recently, I had supposed there was
no need of saying: that amusement is a necessity
of man's nature as truly as food, or drink, or
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
sleep. Physiology, common sense, experience,
philosophy, are all at one on this point. Man
needs something besides change of employment.
He needs something pursued with a view solely
to <emph>enjoyment</emph>. Those who deny this are ignorant
of the simplest fundamental laws of mind and
matter. Men who assert publicly that they need
no amusements, and <q>want to die in the harness,</q>
will have the opportunity of dying in the harness
some years earlier than would be demanded in
the ordinary course of nature. Nature will not
suffer even zealous Christian men to violate this
law with impunity. She forbids man to labor
continuously, and if he persists in disregarding
her prohibition, she will revenge herself by imbecility,
uselessness, or death.
</p>

<p>
This must be assumed in all discussions of the
subject; and it being a religious, no less than a
physical truth, it throws into new prominence
the question, how, as Christians, we are to discharge
this duty without being led away by the
temptation which adjoins it so closely.
</p>

<p>
Let it be borne in mind that we are not now
dealing with individual cases of conscience, but
with general laws. While then there is obviously
a distinction between amusements—while it is
granted that some develop greater capabilities of
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
abuse than others, the attempt to adjust this
question on the basis of <emph>discriminating between
amusements</emph> must result in failure. It always has,
and it always will. This basis is secure only in
a question between an innocent amusement, and
one involving a palpable violation of the law of
God. The advocate of any particular amusement
is, on this ground, shut up to the necessity
of proving that what he approves and practices
is <emph>absolutely pure, and incapable of perversion</emph>. The
moment it is admitted that it can, by any possibility,
be turned to base uses, the lists are thrown
open to all corners, and the utterly insoluble
question arises, <emph>just what degree of capacity for perversion
entitles an amusement to approval or rejection?</emph>
Insoluble, I say, because, not to speak of any
other difficulty, one is obliged to confront the
fact that no one amusement presents a similar
temptation to abuse to all alike. That in which
the slightest indulgence might tend to lead one
man to ruinous excess, excites no interest in
another. It might possibly be dangerous for one
man to play at backgammon, while to another it
would prove no amusement, but only a tedious
method of killing time. On this ground, in short,
it is utterly impossible to adjust this matter
satisfactorily or consistently. The only consistent
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
or safe rule in this view of the case, is
<emph>rigorously to exclude all</emph>, because all are partakers
of the universal taint of sin.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<q>The trail of the serpent is over them all.</q>
</quote>

<p>
It is innocent for boys to play marbles, but
sinful to play dominoes. Wherein, pray? They
can learn to gamble with one as well as with the
other. It is sinful to play billiards, but highly
graceful and innocent to play croquet. But
why? Really, when it comes to a comparison,
the first is infinitely the more beautiful and
intellectual game. The ethical distinctions are
positively bewildering between balls of ivory and
balls of wood; between mallets and cues; between
green baize and green grass. A Christian household
must not sit down and play at whist, but
they are engaged in a Christian and laudable
manner if they spend an evening over Dr. Busby,
or Master Rodbury cards. Really, it is hard to
draw the moral line between cards bearing aces
and spades, and cards with the likenesses of Dr.
Busby's son and servant, Doll the dairymaid, and
the like. When it comes to a question of profit,
one is an amusement involving a good deal of
healthy, mental exertion, while the other is about
as silly and profitless a way of spending an evening
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
as can well be imagined. Youth must not dance,
but they may march to music in company, and
go through calisthenic exercises, involving a good
deal more motion than dancing. But if people
may march to music and be guiltless, it is very
hard to see how skipping to music converts the
exercise into sin. It is said that the <emph>associations</emph>
make the difference; but the advocate of this
theory is shut up to proving that the associations
are inseparable from the amusements. And here
is the place to remark that the best amusements
are the ones most likely to be abused—the ones
which experience shows <emph>are</emph> most abused, and
about which cluster the most evil associations.
The children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light. Men do
not care to counterfeit a coin of inferior value;
and the world is very clear-sighted to discern the
best and richest sources of worldly pleasure, and
utterly unscrupulous in appropriating them
entirely to itself. The amusements which are
most abused, are commonly those which, from
their intrinsic value, call most loudly upon virtue
to rescue them from their abuses.
</p>

<p>
The above method of reasoning, in short, will
not stand the test of plain common sense. It is
trifling, ignoring all distinctions which rest on
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
principles, and substituting factitious ones; and
Christians who assume this ground, lay themselves
open without defense to the logic and ridicule of
any intelligent man of the world who may be
disposed to test the reasons for their scrupulousness.
They condemn themselves in those things
which they allow. The amusements they approve
cannot, in many cases, be compared with those
which they deprecate, either in elegance, profit,
or the amount of intelligence they require.
</p>

<p>
What point then shall we take for the consideration
of this subject? We are confined to
one—the stand-point of the Bible. As Christian
associations we have but one question to ask:
<q><emph>What saith the Word</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the New Testament we find little said about
the <emph>degrees</emph> of sin. The thought which it throughout
tries to impress is, that sin is everywhere;
and under any form, or in any degree, is a
horrible and fatal thing. The tares are gathered
<emph>in bundles</emph> and burned; no matter if one grows a
little shorter, and another a little longer. The
lustful glance is placed in the same category with
the licentious act. The angry thought is of the
same piece with the act of murder. The gospel
contemplates the sins of the race very much as a
man looks at an orange: the rind is full of little
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
protuberances, and a close scrutiny will show that
some of these rise higher than others. But
nobody pretends to notice these variations; they
all spring from one spherical surface, and their
variation is not such as to destroy the general
effect of roundness. So all these fearful developments
of sin spring from one plane, and God hath
concluded the whole sinful world in unbelief.
</p>

<p>
The gospel, therefore, wastes no time in making
distinctions between sins, but aims straight at
remedying the great fact of <emph>sin</emph> as it exists everywhere.
Nor does it leave us in doubt as to its
method. It assumes its own power to purify
anything, and therefore lays down as its great
law of operation, <emph>the law of contact</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This law it sets forth under a parable: The
kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman
took and hid in three measures of meal till the
whole was leavened. The great truth here
illustrated, is the innate power of the gospel to
pervade and assimilate to its own nature the
whole worldly order of things, just as leaven
thus pervades and assimilates the lifeless lumps
of dough. This then, is its simple lesson: Put
the gospel into contact with everything sinful—the
heart of man, the life of man, the employments
of man, the amusements of man—into
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
society, its customs, laws, institutions, and it will
purge them of evil, and bring them into harmony
with the Divine order.
</p>

<p>
But be sure and note, that the entire success
of this action depends upon the contact—upon
<emph>the putting the leaven into the lump</emph>. Fail in this,
and the lump remains heavy. It matters very
little whether the salt have lost his savor or not,
if the meat remain in one dish and the salt in
the other.
</p>

<p>
How thoroughly and beautifully this truth was
carried out in the life and teachings of Christ,
will appear to us more clearly, if we shall recognize
the uniform policy of the gospel <emph>to work for
the destruction of evil, chiefly through the lodgment and
development of good</emph>. Both Christ and his apostles
are exhibited in the gospel story as engaged
chiefly in asserting and illustrating the truth, and
not in combating error. Christ comes into a
world lying in wickedness—besotted by it,
plagued and tormented by it; full of abominations
starting boldly out without pretense of
concealment, from every phase of private, social
and civil life. But he does not approach these
as a mechanic would an old building, saying,
<q>this beam is rotten and must come down; this
roof is decayed and must be stripped off; this
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
floor is unsafe and must be pulled up.</q> He does
not propose to his disciples to enter upon a wholesale
denunciation of profanity and licentiousness.
He points out and condemns many of these things
it is true; but the main lever of his teaching is
the assertion of the great gospel principles. For
these he seeks a place of lodgment everywhere.
The old tables of the law contained but one commandment
that was not prohibitory. Every line
portrayed a crime, with a law standing on guard
beside it, and warning men away with its <q>Thou
shalt not!</q> Christ asserts the authority of the
law; but in the new table it is seen beckoning
toward the commandment, <q>Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart.</q> His instructions
to his disciples do not so much concern the
things which they are to avoid, as they tend to
fix upon their minds right conceptions of his
character and mission. So, I repeat, Christ's
work is less a crusade against evil, than an assertion
of good by precept and example as the
surest means in the end of removing evil. Look,
too, at Paul at Athens, surrounded by heathen
temples, statues and altars. He does not proceed
to demonstrate to the curious multitude that the
philosophies of Zeno or Epicurus are wrong; or
that the worship of Hermes or Athene is absurd.
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
He throws out at once, bold and stern as a mountain
headland, the assertion of the Divine unity,
and follows it up with the doctrines of salvation
through Christ, the resurrection, and the final
judgment. In a few bold strokes he delineates
to the astonished skeptics some salient points of
natural and revealed religion, and then leaves the
truth to germinate and crowd out the evil in its
own way and time.
</p>

<p>
There is indeed a sublimity in this invincible
faith in the power of truth exhibited by the Son
of Man. In the calmness with which he moves
amid the moral ruin that encompasses him, without
that anxious haste, and longing for immediate
results, which characterize so many modern reformers.
The world would have expected a direct
and tremendous onslaught upon evil. It would
have said that the dropping of a seed of positive
truth here and there, would never result in anything.
Christ knew better. He knew the latent
power of truth; its inherent capability of growth;
and he knew that wherever it should find a lodgment,
it would grow; and wherever it should grow,
it would shake down from its branches, like the
mighty tree of the tropics, the germs of a thousand
growths like itself. Now it is this very faith
in the power of gospel truth, as the most effective
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
destroyer of evil, prompting to put the good
boldly into the evil to leaven it, which is sorely
needed in the moral movements of the age.
Bring the subject of amusements to this test.
Compare the action of the church upon it, with
the principles so evidently regulating Christ's
dealing with evil, and see whether it gains by the
comparison. Is it not true, rather, that the Christian
world has, to a very large extent, acted upon
an entirely opposite principle? It has spent much
time in peering into amusements to see what evil
they contained, and has kept digging away at
this, instead of putting Divine grace into them,
in simple faith in God, and letting <emph>that</emph> at once
purge and regulate them. It has been so absorbed
in ferreting out and declaiming against the evil,
as to have forgotten measurably that a corresponding
duty lay upon it to develop the good.
Overlooking, or at least slighting the great philosophical
truth, that amusement is as necessary to
man as bread, and fixing its gaze upon the fact
that it is capable of perversion, it has most signally
failed in the <emph>regulation</emph> of popular amusements,
and in teaching how to use, without
abusing them. It has withdrawn utterly from
many most innocent sources of pleasure; crying,
<q>come out from among them;</q> they are not <emph>safe</emph>;
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
Christians must have nothing to do with them.
And with its withdrawal, the Devil has come in
and taken full possession, and their last state is
worse than the first. When the church has
touched the subject of amusements, it has generally
done so, I think, in a censorious spirit. It
has selected certain amusements as sinful, and
issued decretals and resolutions against them; it
has prescribed penalties against church members
who should engage in them; leaving the question
in its broader relations untouched. It has fenced
off this and that corner of the field of recreation,
and put up signs: <q><emph>all church members are warned
against trespassing on these grounds, under penalty of
the law</emph>,</q> instead of trying to teach Christians how
to avail themselves, with profit and safety, of any
part of the field. We are cut off from Hamlet,
and Lear, and Othello and Macbeth. We cannot
avail ourselves of the interpretation of these by
the best histrionic talent, because the theater has
been suffered to fall so completely into the Devil's
hands, that a Christian cannot countenance what
is good in it, without at the same time countenancing
much that is profane, licentious and
indecent. But if the intelligence and culture
of a community endeavor to apply the principle I
have been advocating, and, in the shape of private
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
theatricals, to furnish a refined, beautiful,
and instructive dramatic exhibition, the outcry is
little less than if they had leased Wallack's or
Niblo's, with a first class troupe; and those Christians
who witness it, are condemned as inconsistent
and backsliders. Just so with dancing. The
idea of Christianity having the remotest connection
with this amusement has been scouted as absurd.
A procrustean law has been enacted—<q><emph>Thou
shalt not dance</emph>.</q> And surely, one would think
from some exhibitions of this amusement, that
Christian leaven <emph>had</emph> been pretty thoroughly
withdrawn from it. One cannot much wonder
at the disgust excited by those importations from
Paris brothels, the round dances, which, with the
present style of female attire, really leave modest
men at some loss what to do with their eyes. Let
us have as much thundering at these as you will.
Let us not mince words. Let ridicule, and sarcasm,
and denunciation exhaust their armories,
for these are abuses; positive evils. But these
abuses are not inseparable from the amusement,
which, in proper forms, is healthy, graceful,
innocent, and highly commendable. Just here
an incident occurs to me which so forcibly illustrates
this last remark that I must relate it as the
involuntary testimony of an enemy. An amiable
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
and most excellent clergyman of this state, happened
to be present one evening when some young
ladies went through a quadrille. He looked on
with great apparent pleasure. The next morning
he was rallied by some of his townsmen on having
countenanced dancing by his presence; when he
roundly denied the charge, and asserted that no
dancing had taken place, but only, as he expressed
it, <q><emph>a most beautiful exercise</emph>.</q> Now, I ask, in the
name of common sense, why not devote a little
Christian care to separating from its abuses, and
regulating in its conduct an exercise which improves
the bearing of our youth, tends to relieve
their natural awkwardness in society, and gives
them innocent exhilaration? But no! <emph>Thou
shalt not dance.</emph> That is Alpha and Omega. Dancing
is liable to abuse, and therefore, O most
astoundingly consistent logic, leave it to become
a prey to all manner of abuses and abominations.
So, if a Christian household makes the attempt
to leaven this unfortunate lump, and claims that
it can, and does introduce graceful and modest
dancing into its family gatherings and social
reunions, it is too often denounced as an enemy
of Christ and a corrupter of the young. For
one I am glad that certain Christian families
of high standing in the church of all denominations,
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
have at last asserted their right to act out
their own convictions in this matter, and have
demonstrated that even this much berated amusement
may be elevated, refined, and made a source
of social pleasure and profit by the infusion of
Christian principle.
</p>

<p>
One more case in point. When our Young
Men's Christian Association of Troy furnished
their new rooms, they did so on the principle that
prayer meetings and religious periodicals, though
important in their place, would not, of themselves,
suffice to attract young men from without.
They had tried the experiment in their forlorn
rooms under a machine shop, in an out-of-the-way
place, furnished as a miniature chapel, and a very
seedy one at that, and the result was that about
six months ago the Association was in a fair way
to die, and make no sign. Young men would
not go to that dismal hole to spend an evening
when more attractive places abounded in the city;
and I would not if I had been in their place.
But the Association got a new lease of life. It
engaged large, airy, pleasant rooms, in a central
position. It kept its prayer meeting room neatly
and appropriately furnished, but it added a large
social parlor, its walls adorned with pictures, a
fine piano invitingly open, the best current periodicals,
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
secular and religious, upon the tables, and
games of checkers, chess, and dominoes distributed
about the room. The young men came in
crowds. They were thrown at once into contact
with the Christian youth of every church in the
city; with the city pastors; with committees,
specially appointed by the churches to take
strangers in charge, with good music, religious
literature, and innocent amusement. For one I
thanked God with all my heart. I thought the
Association had done a great Christian deed. I
hailed it as a happy omen that the Christianity of
our city was beginning to see that the Devil had
tools which <emph>it</emph> might use to advantage, and was
going to take them away from him. But so did
not think others who turned their backs on the
Association, and denounced it as <emph>encouraging
gambling</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This, in short, is the course pursued to a very
great extent with this whole subject of amusements:
assuming that the gospel has no business
with it except to denounce and warn; taking the
leaven away from the lump, instead of putting it
in. Creating a wide separation between two
things, which, of all others in the world need to
be brought into contact—religion and pleasure.
</p>

<p>
And the practical results of this policy are
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
before us. It may be said that the tendency now
is altogether in the direction of excess; that some
Christians are becoming much too liberal, and
are fast obliterating all old landmarks. All I
have to say to this is, that the more true it is, the
better for my position. For, granting, for argument's
sake, all that is asserted, this fact shows
that there is a reaction from an old and false sentiment,
which even if excessive, is a healthy
indication. And the one error goes to prove the
other; for excessive reactions are pretty sure to
grow out of excessive stringency in another
direction. At any rate, the great error of the
church on this subject is clearly exposed, namely:
her failure to regulate amusements. She ought
to have been the gospel's instrument in purifying
them from abuse; but she has not been. She has
been afraid of them; has stood aloof from them;
has been almost totally absorbed in detecting
their evil tendencies; and, on account of these,
forbidding Christians all contact with them. And
to-day she stands comparatively powerless in this
matter. Church assemblies meet and pass strong
and elaborate resolutions on this or that amusement,
condemning it, and those who engage in
it; and a few persons are deterred by these. But
every year the class is increasing that utterly disregards
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
these mandates. It has been said, I know,
that in proportion as the church or individuals
are engaged in religious efforts, the desire for
amusement declines, the implication being that a
desire for amusement characterizes only a low
state of religion. This deduction is entirely
unwarranted, and the process by which it is
reached is fallacious.
</p>

<p>
It is true that in a season of deep religious
interest in a church, there will be less disposition
to amusements. But the same is true of other
than religious interests. Under <emph>any</emph> absorbing,
popular excitement, men do not turn to amusement.
A special religious interest will draw
men's minds from <emph>business</emph> as well as from
pleasure; and the inference to the condemnation
of business is just as legitimate as to that of
amusement.
</p>

<p>
Again, the statement is not borne out in the
ordinary religious life of individuals. Many,
very many of the best, most efficient, and most
steadily growing Christians in the church exhibit
habitually a keen relish for amusements, and for
some which are most sternly condemned, and participate
in them most heartily.
</p>

<p>
And once more: while at revival seasons in
individual churches, a temporary decrease of
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
amusements may be seen, the more important
fact is that the aggregate of Christian society has
been for many years past developing a steadily
increasing interest in the subject, and a corresponding
liberality of sentiment respecting it.
Scores of Christian men have billiard tables in
their houses. Colleges, from which in years past,
students would have been summarily expelled for
rolling ten pins, have now bowling alleys of their
own. Even in the corridors of staid old Williams
the sound of the balls may be heard; and
the revival record of the college does not indicate
that even this stupendous innovation has wrought
to the banishment of the Spirit of God. The
assertors of this inverse ratio between piety and
amusement must, in short, dispose as best they
can, of the fact that along with the growth of
Christian intelligence, Christian benevolence, and
Christian activity, there has been developed in
the church itself a growing sympathy with many
of the very forms of amusement most condemned
by the religious sentiment of an earlier age.
</p>

<p>
And this too, not on the part of the careless,
and pleasure loving, and half-hearted members of
churches, but of men and women high in position
in the church; persons of liberal culture and
unquestionable piety. These persons, as well
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
qualified to understand the teachings of God's
word on this subject as any of the clergy, are
asserting their right to act out their own conscientious
convictions in their amusements: claiming
that they owe to the resolutions of synods, and
conventions and conferences, no more than candid
and respectful consideration, maintaining the
privilege of adopting or rejecting them at pleasure;
and accordingly they are throwing open
their homes to certain banned amusements, very
much to the enhancement of home attractions;
very much to the detriment of the saloons; very
much to the increase of their children's attachment
to home. Church legislation on this subject
has been a humiliating failure. It has not
compassed its intent. Nay, more, it has over-reached
itself. It has kept noble and intelligent
youth out of the church by insisting on their
relinquishment of certain amusements, in the
proper and moderate use of which they were
unable to see evil. It has tended by this insistence
to foster that too common sentiment which
paints religion with sombre hues, and couples it
with the most forbidding associations. It has
tended to drive some to seek in the more liberal
atmosphere of Unitarianism the liberty of conscience
denied them by orthodoxy; and all this it
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
might have avoided by a clearer recognition of
the gospel teaching on this subject: by being less
afraid for the purity of the truth, and by throwing
Christian presence, and Christian participation,
and Christian sentiment boldly into the midst of
the people's amusements, with a view less to
exscind than to regulate.
</p>

<p>
I say, <q>less afraid for the purity of the truth.</q>
For Christians shrink from an experiment so bold,
especially after so large a proportion of amusements
has been usurped by the Devil through
their neglect to interfere. The church is shy of
a faith in the power of good which comes eating
and drinking; which sits at the table of publicans
and sinners. The conviction grows on me
that Christians have too little faith in the gospel.
They do not trust it enough in popular reforms.
They realize that evil is a tremendous power,
alike to be feared, whether it wear the armor
of Goliath, or sing its sweet seductions in the
form of a siren; and their instinct of preservation
extends beyond themselves to the truth itself.
They regard truth as a tender stripling, to be
rolled up in mufflers, and suffered to walk out
only in charge of certain staid nurses of theory;
and not as a man of war in panoply, and with
strength enough to take care not only of itself,
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
but of them and their trusted theories too. They
are afraid the evil will overwhelm or corrupt the
truth; that the leaven, instead of imparting virtue,
will be spoiled by the deadness of the lump.
We need have no such fear for it. All the
developments of the age show that the world
needs it in closer contact with its evil than it has
ever been yet. It is sometimes urged that in
pursuing this course, Christians will bring upon
themselves from the world the charge of inconsistency,
and moreover will grieve weak Christian
brethren. But surely this principle may be pushed
too far. With the very fullest recognition of the
obligation upon Christians not to let their good
be evil spoken of, and not to wrong the weak
conscience—concessions made for the sake of
Christian charity are surely not required to extend
to all the vagaries of individual prejudice, nor to
the abandonment of principle. And there is a
principle involved in this question of amusements,
a principle of far greater importance than many
are willing to admit; and to which, if the Christian
thought of this age do not take more pains
to define it and act upon it, the eyes of the church
will be most painfully opened by and by. There
is a question here involving not only the enjoyments,
but to a great extent the moral welfare of
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
our youth. The young will have amusements,
and the question is whether the devil or the
church shall furnish them. Whether home, or
the ball room, and drinking saloon, and gambling
house shall be the more attractive. Whether
Christians will resolutely take up good and noble
amusements, and give them to youth purged of
their evil,—or whether they shall let them remain
girt with all their allurements, yet more widely
separated from good, and gathering yearly to
themselves new elements and associations of evil.
Very probably the world, and much of the church
will assail the Christian who, in this view of the
subject oversteps the line of received opinion,
with a cry of inconsistency. But remember that
the world judges the church out of its own mouth,
independently of the real merits of the case; and
requires that it be consistent, not with <emph>their</emph> views,
but with its own as publicly expressed. Yet
sometimes it is better to be <emph>right</emph> than even to be
<emph>consistent</emph>; and if the church has with all sincerity,
yet with mistaken zeal, fostered a false sentiment
on any subject, do not Christians who discern the
error owe to society the benefit of their clearer
light? Have they a right to withhold it for fear
society should turn on them and call them inconsistent?
One would think from a sentiment like
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
this that the gospel process was to be reversed.
That not the Christian is to leaven the world, but
the world the Christian. Christian sentiment is
not to wait for popular sentiment. It claims to
be in advance of it. It is to Christians and not
to the world that the promise is given, <q><emph>Ye shall
know the truth</emph>;</q> and Christian thought, so far
from waiting for the movement of these ever
shifting popular tides, is the luminary which God
has set high in the darkness of this world's sin to
draw the tides in his appointed channels. The
practical value of truth like that of money, consists
in its circulation. It is worth nothing hoarded
up or used secretly. If it is ever to be worth anything
in correcting false impressions which society
may have formed of Christian teaching, it will be
by letting it out into society to speak for itself.
Nor am I begging the question at issue here.
Even an error is better outspoken than cherished
in secret. It comes into the field of discussion,
and is turned over and examined and exposed,
and so truth is the gainer after all. But I think
it will be difficult to prove an error in this case.
The gospel truth is <q><emph>put the leaven into the lump</emph>;</q>
and why the gospel should not be put into our
amusements, even into those which are confessedly
abused, I cannot see. The more liable to abuse
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
they are, the more they need regulating; and the
practical workings of this principle when men
have the courage to face prejudice and carry it
out, triumphantly vindicate it. The man who
furnishes his son a billiard table in his own house,
where he can practice that beautiful game with
his friends without the adjuncts of liquor and
rowdyism, does a good deed. He keeps the youth
at home, he keeps his associations under his own
eye; he gives him a good, healthy, intellectual
amusement purged of its abuses. The college
board that erects a bowling alley for the students;
that says to young men, <q>rolling ten pins is not
evil, but rolling ten pins in bar rooms, surrounded
by drunkards and swearers and indecent pictures
<emph>is</emph> evil, and we therefore give you the amusement
without these associations, and bid you enjoy it,
and draw health and strength from it,</q>—that
college board I say, has promoted something more
than <emph>muscular</emph> Christianity. It has given the
young men a better opinion of religion; has withdrawn
them from the influence of temptations
to which they expose themselves only because
they cannot find the amusements freed from these
vile associations. It has drawn just so much
patronage from the grog shop. The parents in
whose family circle dancing in proper modes and
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
with approved associates and within reasonable
hours is encouraged, are doing just so much to
keep their daughters from the unhealthy hours,
the immodest displays, and the indiscriminate
associations of the ball room. They deserve the
thanks, not the reprobation of the church. They
are the friends, not the enemies of religion. Let
us not be scared by names. Let us not deal, as
the pulpit has dealt too much, in vague generalities
on this subject. Let us see what those terrible
words <q>billiards</q> and <q>dancing,</q> and others
of a similar cast mean. Let us see if they are
evil and evil only. Let us not assume that our
youth are attracted to them only by their native
depravity; but see if there be not some goodness,
some beauty, some intellectual stimulus
which renders them so fascinating. If they need
regulating, surely Christian wisdom can regulate
them if anything. If any can use them safely, it
is Christians who are taught by Divine grace to
use this world as not abusing it, and not those
who are swayed by impulse and love of pleasure
only. But the church does not regulate them,
and she never will or can regulate them on the
old theory of separation. Never, so long as she
persists in wholesale denunciations which she
can sustain neither by scripture nor by logic, and
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
against which the common sense of the educated
and thoughtful rebels. A more liberal policy in
the past, a juster appreciation of the gospel teachings
on this subject, would not only have done
much towards separating amusements from their
abuses, but would have saved her from her
present humiliating attitude as the declared enemy
of many forms of amusement, from participation
in which she has no power to restrain her members.
</p>

<p>
This principle has been assailed on the ground
that the world will abuse it. That they will read
in words like these the church's endorsement and
license for unlimited indulgence. But if the
world draws unwarranted inferences to suit its
own depraved wishes, surely that is no reason for
suppressing the truth, but rather calls for the full
and most careful statement of it. If the world
read the gospel wrongly, and wrest it to its own
destruction, those who set forth gospel principles
are not responsible, unless, as has too often been
the case with reference to this subject, the trumpet
give an uncertain sound. And the world is
too ready to pervert this truth, and does pervert
it. Christians, if properly instructed, are so far
from being disqualified to use amusements
safely, the best qualified of all others to develop
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
their highest uses, and to enjoy without abusing
them. The world regards only the permission
to enjoy, and ignores the corresponding rule of
restraint. In this respect it is like the prince in
the Arabian tale, who mounted the enchanted
horse, and set him in motion without having informed
himself as to the means of guiding or
stopping him.
</p>

<p>
For, let me be clearly understood, I do not lay
down this general principle without recognizing
the existence of practical limitations to its action,
though I assert that the fixing of these limitations
belongs chiefly if not entirely to the individual
Christian conscience. I have said that the tendency
of religious teaching with reference to this
and kindred subjects has been to make the idea
of <emph>safety</emph> more prominent than that of <emph>development</emph>.
Yet I do not overlook, as was implied in the
remarks of one who objected to my views, the
defensive aspect of the gospel. I admit both the
fact and its urgent necessity I could not do
otherwise, knowing that the heart is deceitful,
and remembering the prayer which Christ puts
into every man's mouth, <q>Lead us not into temptation.</q>
I am pleading for the restraints as well
as for the privileges of the gospel in the matter
of men's amusements; for more and not less care
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
and watchfulness to be brought to bear upon their
future regulation.
</p>

<p>
But withal, I am not bound to abandon the
general gospel principle of purging amusements
by a closer contact of religion with them, because
in certain cases this regulation becomes a matter
of extreme difficulty and delicacy; because I cannot
precisely say <emph>how</emph> the gospel leaven is to be
conveyed into certain forms of amusement. Just
as consistently might I have refused to denounce
slavery as a crime against God and humanity
because I could not prescribe an effectual scheme
for abolishing it. And that such difficulties do
arise in the applications of this principle, I freely
admit.
</p>

<p>
There, for example, is the theatre. I believe
this principle applies to that as well as to any
other amusement. For myself I wish that I
could occasionally see Shakespeare interpreted
by the best histrionic talent, with all adjuncts of
scenery and costume. To me it would be a rich
pleasure and a source of intellectual improvement.
But as the theatre is now conducted and
sustained, I am clearly of the opinion that no
Christian ought to frequent it. He cannot do so
without, I think, in the great majority of instances,
committing himself to very much that is indecent
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
and coarse. And just how this difficulty is to be
surmounted, how scholarly, Christian men who
love such entertainments and are qualified to
profit by them, are to be furnished with them
freed from their abuses, I am not now prepared
to say. I think it might be done; but the theatre,
as it now is, is no place for a Christian.
</p>

<p>
This, however does not, as before observed, in
the least invalidate the general principle. It is
merely a question of means. Nor, as was very
roundly asserted, does the principle lead to this
conclusion that every Christian man must have
his box at theatre or opera. It by no means
follows that such a course would produce the
desired effect. It would be just about as pertinent
to argue that because a sewer in a certain
street needed cleansing, and because a proper
array of men and buckets and brooms would
cleanse it, therefore every man and woman on the
streets, grave doctors of divinity, stately Mr.
Dombey, Flora McFlimsey and Edmund Sparkler,
should each shoulder broomstick or bucket, and
plunge pell mell into the reeking filth. This
argument proceeds upon the assumption that
Christians can purge amusements only by using
them in the forms and with the appliances attendant
upon the world's abuse of them. This is
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
assuming altogether too much. We must get
religion into these things, but there are various
ways of doing it. You cannot sow broadcast in
all soils.
</p>

<p>
I do not know whether I ought notice one
other line of reply to these remarks; but as it
seems to be a favorite one, and moreover was
adopted by some who I was surprised to see descending
to it, I will add a few words on this.
</p>

<p>
It may be described as an attempt to invalidate
a principle by showing that its application to persons
of widely different times and circumstances
involves an absurdity and then from the absurdity
inferring a sin. I do not pretend to give the exact
words used, but they were in this style: <q>Think
of Paul dancing; or Peter playing billiards!
Do you think we shall have checker-boards in
heaven?</q> And much more of the same kind.
</p>

<p>
Now this is not argument. It is sheer nonsense;
and most unworthy trifling over a serious
subject. The reasoning, if it be worthy the name,
is simply this; Certain things appear incongruous
with our ideas of the character and work of
certain men: therefore these things are sinful.
It is the easiest thing in the world to invent situations
of this kind. Such men as Paul and Peter
are associated in our minds with but one set of
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
ideas;—with one great, glorious, solemn work;
and their association with any inferior matter
affects us unpleasantly at first. Even when we
think of Paul making tents, there is at first view
something that clashes in our mind with the
speech on Mars Hill, and the healing of the cripple
at Lystra. But who thinks of disputing from
this the propriety of Paul's own hands ministering
to his necessities? After all, if there is no
sin in rolling ten pins, I know not why Peter
should not have participated in that very excellent
and healthful recreation with as much propriety
as any of the numerous ministers of the present
day who <q>roll</q> with so much zest and assiduity
at our fashionable watering places. Think of
Paul dancing! Well, think of him! Think of
Paul wearing a blue swallow-tailed coat with
brass buttons! How he would have looked under
the shadow of the Acropolis, the winds of the
Ægean gently swaying his cerulean skirts, and
the eager faces of Stoic and Epicurean reflected
in the bright buttons! Think of Peter skating;
cutting figures of eight, and performing <q>outer
edge backwards!</q> Think of John in a white
cravat; or of Bartholomew putting up seidlitz
powders; or of Timothy running with a fire-engine!
How <emph>would</emph> they have looked? Therefore hasten
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
ye trim gentlemen, to doff your guilty blue and
brass, and don the toga. Lay aside your skates,
boys. Peter would have looked very strangely
skating, therefore it is sinful to skate. Tear off
your white chokers, ye Reverends, and throw
away your pestles ye apothecaries, and be like
the apostles. Shall we have checker-boards in
heaven? No, brother, I presume not. Neither
shall we marry, nor be given in marriage; but
pray don't condemn us to celibacy on that ground
while we remain upon earth. <q>Would you play
chess on your death-bed?</q> Probably not, my
friend. Neither would I put on my boots, or do
a great many other very innocent things. Death
stands out in startling contrast to <emph>all</emph> our employments:
to business and study, as well as to recreation;
and you would find it vastly inconvenient
to act upon the principle that nothing must be
done which you would not do on your death-bed.
</p>

<p>
But enough of this. I come now to the one
practical application of these principles out of
which this whole discussion has grown.
</p>

<p>
When our Troy Christian Association adopted
the practice of introducing games into their rooms,
I gave it my hearty approval. My opinion on
this subject has been confirmed by what I have
seen and heard of the results of the experiment.
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
It was based on the principles I have been advocating
in this paper, and on the farther consideration,
growing out of these, that we must take
some of the devil's weapons and sanctify them
before we could successfully fight him on his own
ground. As remarked already, prayer-meetings
will not draw irreligious young men into the
sphere where we want them. Give them first
well lighted and warmed apartments, handsomely
furnished, where they can find music and books
and newspapers and games, and you stand some
chance then of drawing them into the prayer-meetings.
And indeed the direct religious influence
of these associations, while highly important,
is nevertheless subordinate to their work in
bringing young men into contact with the various
churches of the community, where the religious
appliances are of course more perfect. The great
point is to get them into some position where the
churches can reach them. They will not come
to church, many of them, when they first enter
the community. The church has but limited
facilities for finding them out in their stores and
boarding-houses and schools; and it may find
therefore a powerful auxiliary in these associations,
which bring the stranger youth where it can
bring its influences to bear on them. But for
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
this purpose the place of rendezvous must be
made attractive. We must have head-quarters as
pleasant as the devil's. I hope all of you have
read the article in <hi rend='italic'>Guthrie's Sunday Magazine</hi>
for January, 1866, entitled <q><hi rend='italic'>The house that beats
the public house;</hi></q> that splendid iron structure in
Colne, Lancashire, built expressly for the irreligious
working class. There are fountains, and
pictures, and games, cabinets and books and
newspapers. There are quiet reading rooms,
there are refreshment rooms, even smoking
rooms. There is a school room, there are musical
entertainments on stated nights, there are
religious services on Sabbath evenings. <q>On
Christmas eve, 1863,</q> says the writer, <q>the musicians
at one of the public houses piped for some
time, but no dancers presented themselves, till at
length the players themselves adjourned to the
meeting at the Iron School. An attempt to open
the theatre that winter failed through the same
influence. The actors, after struggling for a
week in the face of empty benches, left the place
in despair.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here is a clear and successful recognition of
the truth that religion has not such strong alliance
with the unregenerate heart that she can
afford to dispense with all legitimate aids and
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
recommendations. The firemen have their upper
parlor in the engine house furnished richly and
tastefully. The drinking saloons are invested
with all the attractions that marble, and glass,
and drapery and pictures can give them. One
man who appeared last week before the excise
commissioners, said he had expended ten thousand
dollars in fitting up his saloon. He knew
it would pay; and we cannot expect irreligious
young men to be drawn away from these by mere
religious appliances. We must employ other
attractions. We must make our houses beat the
public houses. We must sanctify new forces for
this end. Pictures and cabinets, carpets and
draperies, music and games are not the devil's
any more than they are ours. Young men will
have some retreat beside their comfortless boarding-houses;
some society besides their landlord's
family, and it is a match between the devil and
the church which of us shall furnish these.
Depend upon it, if the church do not give them
amusement, regulated on a liberal Christian basis,
the devil will give them abundance that is unregulated.
God forbid that Christian squeamishness
should suffer them to turn aside to the house whose
gates lead to hell, and to habits which shall make
mothers curse the day they gave them birth.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
I will give two incidents showing the practical
working of this new system in the Troy Association.
A member of my church, walking in the
street one evening, saw three young men just
before him, and overheard one say to the others,
<q>Come, let's go and take a drink.</q> One of the
others replied, <q>No, I don't care to take a drink.
Let's go to the Christian Association Rooms.</q>
<q>Pshaw!</q> said the third, <q>I don't want to go
there to prayer meeting.</q> <q>No, no,</q> was the
response; <q>they've got a right nice place there,
and we can have a good time.</q> He went on
describing the rooms, and then added: <q><emph>and
they're for just such fellows as we are</emph>.</q> He gained
his point, and they followed him to the rooms.
</p>

<p>
Three clubs of young men, or boys rather, were
broken up soon after the new rooms were opened.
I do not know their character fully, but have
been told that drinking was practiced at their
meetings. They now frequent the rooms of the
society, and pay over into its treasury their club
subscriptions. There are many more of such
cases. They speak with trumpet tongues as to
the value of this policy. They show that its
practical influence is against the groggery and
the gambling saloon, and if it work no other
result, that of itself is vindication enough.
</p>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<p>
And now I leave the subject. I do not shrink
from the application of this Bible principle to our
amusements. The other, the separative policy,
the keeping of leaven and lump apart, has been
tried, and has failed, utterly failed.
</p>

<p>
Will it not be well to try another policy? I
want for our youth a Christianity that shall not
relax one iota of its obligation to God or to man.
That shall not bate one jot from an entire consecration
of heart and life to God; that shall walk
closely with God, and feel as deeply as human
weakness can feel, the necessity of watchfulness
and of divine care to keep it from temptation. I
challenge any man to draw undue license from
the principles I have asserted. But I want more
joy brought out of the world by Christians. I
want the gospel carried boldly into some things
from which it has been kept aloof. I want Christian
life to be in the spirit more than in the letter.
I do not plead for less but for more conformity
to the spirit and teaching of Christ. Not for a
lower but for a higher Christian life; for a wider
application of gospel principles, a more implicit
trust in the leavening power of truth; a more
practical belief in the assertion that the weapons
of our warfare are mighty through God to the
pulling down of strongholds. I want Christian
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
conscience clothed with principles and not with
dogmas. I want the word of God read and
interpreted fairly, and that allowed which it
allows. I protest against its being twisted and
perverted into rules for the unnecessary abridgment
of Christian liberty, where it lays down
only general principles for the conscience. I
want less of the religion that is
</p>

<lg>
<l><q>Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
and more of that which is full of child-like trust
in the love of God and the power of truth, and of
freedom purged by love from license.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>The True Nonconformist.</head>
<head type="sub">A Communion Sermon, Delivered Sept. 16, 1866,</head>
<head type="sub">In The First Presbyterian Church, Troy, N. Y.</head>

<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>

<quote rend="display">
Rom. xii, 2. <q><hi rend='italic'>And be not conformed to this world:
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind,
that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God</hi>.</q>
</quote>

<p>
By itself, this command is ambiguous. Common
sense testifies that, in very many things,
every Christian <emph>must</emph>, more or less, conform to
the world. Many of the world's customs are not
only harmless, but salutary, beautiful, ennobling,
necessary to the very being of society. We need
some test by which to interpret this command.
</p>

<p>
Let us first endeavor, as a means of discovering
it, to clear away a preliminary error, viz.: the
not uncommon idea that difference from the
world is a matter of any value or consequence of
itself. A great many persons, lamenting over
real or supposed deficiencies of Christians, make
this the staple of their complaint; <emph>you cannot
distinguish them from the world:</emph> and when urging
upon them some duty, or the relinquishment
of some practice, enforce it by the argument,
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
Christians should aim to be distinct from the
world.
</p>

<p>
There is truth in this, but there is also falsehood.
Christians, <emph>real</emph> Christians, will always be
distinct from the world, and the distinction will
be very clearly defined. But Christians should
not make it their <emph>object</emph> to be distinct from the
world. They should aim to be Christians, and
let the distinction follow in its natural order and
degree. Singularity, in itself, is no virtue. It
is just as likely to be a vice. A man is not
necessarily better because he is unlike the rest
of the world. Difference from the world, therefore,
is not an <emph>end</emph> of Christian discipline, but a
result and concomitant of it. This distinction is
of the utmost importance. If distinctiveness is
regarded as an <emph>object</emph> of Christian effort, its value
is sacrificed. Its tendency is to formality; to
the substitution of a variety of <emph>outward</emph> standards
of duty for a single <emph>inward</emph> regulative principle.
To pride and self-righteousness on the ground of
singularity. Such have been its developments,
for instance, in certain religious sects who insisted
on plainness of dress as a duty. Undoubtedly
the spirit which originally prompted the requisition
was good, Christlike. It was the desire to
take from the useless adornment of the person
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
and bestow upon objects of Christian effort and
charity. It was the desire to remove temptations
to vanity and idle display. But in too many cases
these things were forgotten. Christians received
the precept in the letter and not in the spirit.
They came to insist on plainness of dress as a
mark of a true Christian, and forgot that materials
of plain or sad colors might be as costly and
rich as gayer ones. They came to pride themselves
on their plainness as a distinction from
the rest of the world. They said bitter and
unchristian things against the man who should
carry a gold watch or the woman who should
wear a feather or a ribbon. They perverted
scripture to uphold this ridiculous whim, and
brought scorn upon themselves and reproach
upon the cause of Christ, because they turned
their eyes from the inward, regulative power of
the gospel to one of its natural developments, and
looked at that until it grew out of all proportion.
</p>

<p>
How then are we rightly to apply this command?
</p>

<p>
The apostle, in giving us an answer, takes up
the question at the very point at which most
inquirers do, viz.: at the matter of <emph>sacrifice</emph>. For
this is the way in which it presents itself to most
minds. In order not to be conformed to the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
world, I must sacrifice much that is of the world.
What, now, may I retain, and what must I
relinquish?
</p>

<p>
And in Paul's answer, he strikes directly at
any such method of putting the question. Non-conformity
to the world involves sacrifice, it is
true, but not a sacrifice made in any such spirit
as this—a spirit that ere it gives itself to Christ,
sits down and begins to sort its possessions, pleasures,
pursuits, into two piles, saying: <q>this for
God, this for the world: this goes back to my
treasure house, this I throw away.</q> Not so.
He sweeps the whole into one heap, and says,
<q>I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God,
that ye <emph>present your bodies a living sacrifice, and be
transformed by the renewing of your mind</emph>.</q> He
asks that the <emph>whole man</emph>, with all his belongings,
be made an offering to God, even as he says in
another place, <q>the very God of peace sanctify
you <emph>wholly</emph>, and I pray God your whole spirit
and soul and body be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.</q> He rises
above details of sacrifice to a sacrifice which
includes and regulates all details; and in so doing
he is but insisting upon the precept of Christ:
<q>If any man will be my disciple, let him <emph>deny
himself</emph>.</q> And notice particularly the meaning
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
of this precept which is so generally but half
understood. It is not, let him cut himself off
from this thing or that thing, but let him <emph>deny
himself</emph>; literally, let him <emph>say that self is not</emph>, and
that the will of Christ is <emph>everything</emph>. Holding
fast this principle a man cannot greatly err.
The will of Christ and the will of the world are
so diametrically opposite, that he cannot go toward
the one without going away from the other.
A man has no business to waste time pondering
over the <emph>details</emph> of his sacrifice for Christ's sake,
tormenting himself with deciding between what
is right and what is wrong; what is worldly and
what is heavenly. The will of Christ once
heartily embraced as a rule of life will teach him
to decide. Christ received into the heart will
regulate its affinities and repulsions. The law
of the <emph>spirit</emph> of life in Christ Jesus shall make the
soul free from the law of sin and death, so that it
shall hate the things it once loved, and love those
it once despised.
</p>

<p>
Young people often come to their pastor
saying: <q>If I become a Christian, must I give
up such and such things? Must I discharge such
and such duties?</q> And for myself I reply to
them—<q>I have no answer to give you. I will
not encourage you to come to Christ in this mean,
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
bargain-making spirit. If your conscience tells
you a thing is wrong, as it does in many cases,
you have no need to ask me if Christ will require
its relinquishment. You know he will, without
any compromise. But when it comes to any
doubtful matter, waive that question. You have
nothing whatever to do with it now. Christ
requires of you to be willing to obey him implicitly
in all things, without regard to your own
feelings or preferences, your own prosperity or
safety, no matter what duties or sacrifices obedience
involves; and I simply ask you <emph>are you
willing to do this?</emph> If you are not, Christ does not
want you. A young man goes to a recruiting
office to enlist. The sergeant examines him,
and says: <q>you are just the kind of man I want.
Here, put down your name. Your bounty is
so much; your pay will be so much.</q> The recruit
takes the pen in his hand, but stops suddenly in
the act of writing his name, and says: <q>How far
shall I be required to march daily? What kind
of a tent shall I have? Must I do picket duty
beyond regular hours? To what kind of a climate
am I to be sent?</q> How long do you suppose the
officer would keep patience with such a man?
How many of these questions would he pretend
to answer, even if he could? He would simply
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
say to the man: <q>we make no terms with you,
sir, beyond your bounty and pay. If you enlist,
you do so with the understanding that a soldier
has nothing to do but obey orders; to serve
where, when, and how he may be directed. If
you want to know these things, enlist, and you
will find out when you are in service.</q> Just so I
say to one who begins inquiring into the details
of Christ's service: If you want to find out, enlist.
Commit your life to Christ's keeping. Devote
yourself to Christ's service, and <q>if any man <emph>wills</emph>
to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine.</q>
An inquirer for salvation, tormenting himself
about what he must do and what relinquish, forgets
that he is in no condition to decide such a
question. To decide it he wants just that spiritual
insight and those new affinities which faith in
Christ and the consequent renewal of his nature
will give him. He wants to see these things
from a stand-point which he has not yet attained.
He had far better let them go for the present,
and concentrate his resolution on this one point:
<q>I give myself to Jesus without reserve. Whatever
he tells me I may enjoy I will endeavor to
enjoy in his love and fear. Whatever he bids
me cast away, though it be a right hand, I will
cut it off and cast it from me.</q></q> A young man
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
once came to me saying: <q>There seems to be but
one thing in the way of my entire surrender to
Christ. If I become a Christian, and a member
of the church, I don't see how I can ever take
any public part in the religious meetings. If I
could only decide whether God required this of
me, I think my way would be clear.</q> I said to
him, <q>My brother, you are not called on to settle
that question now. You have no means of deciding
it. You had better drop it altogether for
the present. God has promised that if you will
commit your ways unto him he will direct you.
Now I believe you sincerely want to do God's
will, and that you are ready, whenever he shall
show it you, to pledge yourself to do your duty.
Leave the matter there; and if, at any time, this
duty should be thrust upon you, do it in God's
name and strength.</q> He soon after joined the
church, and has borne himself since with a fidelity
and devotion which speak well for the thoroughness
of the work of grace in him.
</p>

<p>
Now this is what the apostle means by a <emph>living</emph>
sacrifice. This spirit of consecration infused into
sacrifice fills it with life. The sacrifice becomes
<q>living</q> only when self dies; when the man says
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">Here Lord, I give myself away:</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">'Tis all that I can do.</q></l>
</lg>

<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>

<p>
The other method of securing nonconformity to
the world by acting for the mere sake of difference
or according to circumstances, constitutes a
dead sacrifice. Such were the sacrifices of the
Pharisees. They thanked God they were not as
other men; but the difference was but outward.
To the spectator's eye they were not conformed
to the world. They did not dress like it. Their
prayers were longer and more frequent. They
did not eat with publicans and sinners. But
these differences had become the chief end of
their religious life. Their development was like
arranging the limbs of a corpse for exhibition.
They were not the natural, spontaneous outgrowths
of a living inward principle; and hence
the Pharisees have passed into history as the representative
hypocrites of all time.
</p>

<p>
The essential character of this self-sacrifice
will farther appear from a correct understanding
of the phrase <emph>reasonable service</emph>. On this, two
things must be remarked. 1st, that the expression
does not belong to the words <q><emph>living sacrifice</emph></q>
alone, but to the whole exhortation. In other
words, it is not the <emph>living sacrifice</emph> which is a reasonable
service, but the presenting the bodies a
living sacrifice, <q>holy, acceptable unto God.</q>
2dly, it is to be noted that the expression <q><emph>reasonable
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
service</emph></q> is very commonly misunderstood
to mean a service which is proper or becoming;
which we have the best of all reasons for rendering.
This is all true; but this is not what the
text means. It signifies a service whose main
spring is in the <emph>thinking, reasoning, spiritual</emph> department
of man's nature—a spiritual service
rendered to a God who is a spirit, and who requireth
to be worshiped in spirit and in truth. Of such
Peter says: <q>ye also, as lively stones, are built up
<emph>a spiritual house</emph>, a holy priesthood, to offer up
<emph>spiritual sacrifices</emph> acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.</q> In pursuance of this idea, the apostle, in
our text, after speaking of the presenting of <emph>the
body</emph> as a living sacrifice, and of such a presentation
as a <emph>reasoning</emph> service, gives us the key to the
whole thought by his final exhortation, <q>be ye
transformed by the <emph>renewing of your mind</emph>;</q> so
that it is clear that the outward conformity of the
body to God's will, is made both a living sacrifice
and a reasoning service by having its mainspring
in a renewed mind. Only thus will the body be
offered alive to God. Only thus will the mind be
truly transformed. All the outward developments
of the life will then bear the stamp of a reasoning
service. The way of peace will be chosen
from conviction. The will, self-impelled, will
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
set toward God. The conscience will be alive
with a divinely inspired sensitiveness. All the
affections and desires, of their own accord, will
stretch their hands towards Christ, and the
renewed man will daily realize that the water
which Jesus gives is <emph>in</emph> him, living water, springing
up into everlasting life.
</p>

<p>
It is then clear, I think, from what has been
said, that nonconformity to the world is not the
<emph>aim</emph>, but one of the incidents of Christian life.
The Christian's <emph>aim</emph> is distinctly stated here to be
the proving of the will of God—that which is
good, acceptable and perfect. Yet nonconformity
to the world will develop itself as a <emph>necessary incident</emph>
of Christian living. Being transformed by
the renewing of the mind, the outward life will
necessarily be transformed also, and will cease to
be conformed to the world. The soul which
desires that which is good, acceptable, perfect,
can no longer find affinity with that which is bad,
imperfect, and displeasing to God. The differences
are not incidental, they are generic. The
Christian and the world belong to different orders;
are regulated by different laws. The Christian
is, as it were, grafted upon the new stock, and can
no more bear the fruit of his old sinful life, than
the ingrafted branch can bear its former fruit.
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
Old things have passed away. All things have
become new. He is a new creature in Christ
Jesus. These differences have not to be marked
by finely drawn lines of casuistry. There are
indeed points at which the worldly and the Christian
life run for a little way parallel. Points
where neither party can very well act differently
from the other. But for all that, the divergence
is wide enough at many other points to leave no
doubt. I am speaking now of <emph>true</emph> Christians,
thoroughly renewed in the spirit of their mind;
courageous, unflinching, consistent Christians:
not of those whifflers and compromisers who call
themselves Christians, and who try to trim between
God and the world, so as to relinquish no
advantages on the side of either. A man cannot
live many hours by the rule of Christ without
coming into direct issue with the world. And
now, as to these points of difference, they are,
of course, too numerous to be dealt with in detail.
And I can, therefore, only call your attention to
one or two classes of them.
</p>

<p>
1st: On which I need not dwell, is the class of
<emph>worldly sins</emph>. Of course the transformed man will
not be conformed to the world in these. Not that
a Christian never errs, by any means, but that
the general current of his life will set in the direction
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
of pleasing God, and away from those things
which are plainly contrary to his will.
</p>

<p>
2d. A marked difference develops itself in the
region of the motives, the tempers, the dispositions,
and the principles of action. Sometimes it
is difficult to pronounce upon these differences
with certainty, yet some of them are easily recognizable.
Two men will often do precisely the
same thing from different motives. A Christian
and a worldly man, for example, are foully abused
by a profane ruffian. Both receive the abuse in
silence, and go their way without bestowing any
attention upon him. But the two are commonly
actuated by very different impulses. The one
turns away with anger and loathing, and is silent
because it is beneath his dignity to reply, or to
notice the aggressor. The other, though tempted
to anger, remembers the example of him whom
he serves. Who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again and leaves the railer, striving to pity his
ignorance, and to forget his insult. Pride accomplishes,
outwardly, in the one case, what Christian
humility does in the other. So in cases of
great affliction, it is sometimes hard to decide,
from outward indications, whether divine grace
or native force of will is the stronger. The
worldly man will exhibit equal composure with
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
the Christian; will seem, for the time, to accept
the visitation with no less equanimity than the
other. But those who are much with men under
such circumstances, and come perhaps as close to
their hearts as it is possible for man to do, recognize
a very decided difference. They know that
the composure which springs from stoicism, iron
nerve, indomitable will, is a different thing from
that which is born of submission and resignation
to the will of God. That the one but crowds the
sharp grief deeper into the heart, and shuts up
the fountain of healing tears, and makes the man
hard and sullen and defiant, and chills his sympathies,
and disposes him to solitary brooding,
and after all, gives way at last, and leaves him a
broken reed, while the other finds in the breach
which God made in his cherished plans, an
opening through which heaven smiles on him,
rises on the ruins of his wrecked hopes to a purer
and more unselfish life, draws sweetness out of
his sorrow, and wins a firmer trust in God, and
a deeper and more comprehensive sympathy for
his sorrowing brethren everywhere. These differences
are endless. They cover every variety
of experience. The world talks of the dignity
of man, asserts his knowledge and his unimpaired
judgment. The Christian distrusts his deceitful
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
heart and fallen nature, and becomes a little
child that he may know the truth. The world
walks by sight and sneers at faith. Faith is the
Christian's atmosphere, out of which he cannot
breathe freely. The world talks of law, the
Christian of providence. The world knows
God, either vaguely, as a deity to be feared for
his power, and but dimly apprehended by man,
or as a mere aggregate of laws divorced from
any real, apprehensible personality. The Christian
communes and walks with him daily as a
tender, loving, and wise father.
</p>

<p>
But I hasten to a third class of differences,
with which I shall deal more at length: I mean
those which appear in the Christian's conduct
respecting those things which he uses in common
with the world. Under this head falls that large
class of actions, which, <emph>in themselves considered</emph>, have
no moral value, but acquire one from the end they
are made to serve, the manner in which they are
pursued, or the motive in which they originate.
On these arise the most perplexing of all moral
questions, the most subtle cases of conscience, and
too often, I grieve to say, the most acrimonious
discussions. Under this head are included most
of those vexed questions as to amusements, dress,
meat and drink, and the like. And this text,
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
I am sorry to say, has been made the basis for
inculcating some most false and pernicious doctrines
concerning these things.
</p>

<p>
Now it seems to me that very many of the
difficulties which arise on these subjects are quite
unnecessary, and would be in great part destroyed
by resting upon the simple, unequivocal
testimony of the Bible. I do not think that God's
Word is at all wanting in explicitness on these
points. Here is this text for instance. Nothing
can be plainer. It tells us our first great duty is
to submit our wills to God's will; to commit
ourselves to his guidance without reserve, a living
sacrifice; to be transformed; and that when this
shall have been done, we shall know what the will
of God is; we shall practically prove what is good
and acceptable and perfect, and, as a matter of
course, shall not be conformed to the sinful principles
and practices of the world. Now it follows
from this that whatever is good and acceptable and
perfect, not opposed to the new principle of life
in us, is ours, given us by God to use and enjoy;
and that in the use and enjoyment of it within
the limits he prescribes, we <emph>are not conformed to the
world</emph> in any bad sense. I say this, well aware
that every one of these things contains capabilities
for abuse, and that the world does most
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
sadly abuse them; and this brings me directly to
my point that the difference between Christians
and the world as respects these things is to be
developed <emph>in the proper use and regulation by
Christians of what the world abuses</emph>. Christians
are not to be driven from every point which the
world sees fit to occupy by the hue and cry of
nonconformity. They are to remember that in
these things there is a duty to be done as well as
a pleasure to be enjoyed, and that they are to
show their nonconformity, not by abandoning,
but by refusing to conform to the world's excesses,
and by insisting on the restraining
principles of God's Word. Let us here hold
closely by the opening thought of our discussion,
that conformity to the world <emph>in itself</emph> is no sin,
and nonconformity <emph>in itself</emph> no virtue. Conformity
to the world is sinful when the world's practice
is sinful and not otherwise.
</p>

<p>
Now this is a very plain rule. It is Christ's
rule. Paul takes it directly from Christ. But I
am aware that another question enters here,
namely, that of expediency. There may be private
considerations tending to make the relinquishment
of a harmless thing expedient for you or for me.
There may be considerations growing out of
your relations to others which may render use
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
inexpedient. In such cases, expediency, of course,
assumes <emph>to you</emph> the obligation of law. But as
regards these cases no man can decide for you.
The Bible throws them on your own conscience.
Let every man be fully persuaded <emph>in his own mind</emph>.
Expediency is a matter for individuals. No
law can be laid down for it. The two things
necessarily exclude each other. If you lay it
down that such a course is expedient for <emph>every one</emph>,
you remove the matter at once from the region
of expediency, and put it on the ground of law;
and this course no man nor body of men is ever
justified in pursuing. Such a step trenches on the
sacred enclosure of the individual moral sense, a
holy of holies, into which man and his Maker
alone enter. At the same time, abundant light
will be given to every humble, faithful child of
Christ, to settle these questions of expediency.
When love to God is the moving principle of a
man's life, it develops in him an insight which
guides him unerringly through questions where
casuistry would become hopelessly entangled.
You may see the same truth illustrated in your
own homes. See that loving, obedient child,
whose highest delight is to perform your behest
and anticipate your wishes. How very few errors
that child commits, even in cases where you have
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
laid down no rule. It reaches the knowledge of
your wishes through a kind of instinct as reliable
as it is undefinable. Surely faith ought to
teach us to expect a clew through such mazes
from a Father who has promised that he will direct
the paths of those who acknowledge him.
</p>

<p>
And here, I insist, whether the question be one
of law or of expediency, has been a grave error
of the church in not trusting enough to this
inward principle of life in the soul, to this insight
of love, to regulate the outward developments of
the life, and to prevent the obliteration of the
lines between the church and the world. She
has busied herself too much with details, and not
enough with that which lies back of them; too
much with the circumference and not enough
with the centre. Christ teaches us that if the
fountain be pure, the streams must be pure.
But the church, in her unconscious distrust of the
purifying power of the fountain, has thrown into
the streams such abundance of mint, anise, and
cummin, that the taste of the original water is
sometimes sadly impaired. Too often, while she
has been busy with the streams, the fountain
head has been gathering unsuspected poison.
While I recognize the church's duty to watch
carefully over Christ's flock, to counsel, rebuke,
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
restrain, I think that she has encouraged, in
many cases, by her want of faith in the power
of the relation between Christ and the believer,
an artificial religious life, a factitious conscience,
a life wanting the freedom and naturalness of
movement properly engendered by the gospel. I
think she should have insisted more on having this
clearly defined and constantly maintained, more
on a full assurance, and a lively faith, and an ever
burning love, and less on details which these
would have regulated of themselves. I believe
that if she had done this, and moreover had
preached the word literally and boldly to the
people, had told the people their privilege to use
God's gifts, and pointed them to the principle of
love to God as competent to regulate use,
and not twisted its declarations into warrants
for the abridgment of Christian liberty,—there
would be in the church to-day more simple,
strong, manly, intelligent piety, and far less conformity
to the world. This distinction between
safe and unsafe truths is a Romish and not a
Protestant idea; and the temporary gain secured
by acting upon it is more than counterbalanced
by the final pernicious result.
</p>

<p>
It is far safer for me and for you that I preach this
truth to you boldly and plainly; and I have a special
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
object in bringing it to your notice now, at this
solemn season when you are reviewing the past,
and making a new consecration of yourselves to
the service of Christ.
</p>

<p>
Here, as you renew your original vow to come
out from the world, it is well that you do this
with no vague idea of what you promise. What
I shall now say applies to most if not all of you,
but especially to the younger members of the
church. As you enter upon a season of special
religious activity, you also enter upon a season
which society is wont to devote largely to pleasure.
Ere another communion season shall have
come round, the season for evening entertainments
and festal gatherings, will be at its height. From
the nature of circumstances you will be called
upon to participate in these more or less; and it
is at these points that the temptation to conformity
to the world will be most likely to assail
you.
</p>

<p>
Most of you are probably aware of the ground
I have recently taken before the public on the
subject of amusements; a position which has excited
considerable comment, and some censure. I
do not see why it should. There is nothing novel
in my views on this subject. I have merely stated
the gospel principle, the principle which Christ
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
propounded, and by which he lived—that the
proper and only way to preserve our pleasures
or anything else from abuse, is to put Christian
leaven into them. That our duty in such matters,
is not to give them over bodily to the devil
and to the world, to be abused and perverted at
their pleasure; but to save them from such perversion,
and make them legitimate instruments of
Christian joy and growth, by using them in the
name and under the law of Christ. If these
things are evil, we have no right to have anything
to do with them. If they are, though not
evil in themselves, so under the dominion of evil,
and so dependent upon evil for support, as the
theatre, for example, is, that Christian participation
cannot separate them from their abuses, we
ought to abandon them. But as to the general
principle, that it is abuse and not proper use
which Christ condemns, and that many of the
things which the devil has usurped, are as much
yours as his, there can be no doubt. I have not
one word to modify or retract of what I have
written on this subject. Challenged, I would
reiterate it word for word, if I knew I should go
from this pulpit to my grave. And I dare any
Christian to draw from what I have written, or from
what I have said to-day, license for improper conformity
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
to the world. If you do so, depend on it,
<emph>you</emph> and not <emph>I</emph> will be condemned. And I rejoice
especially to-day, in having assumed this position;
because I have never had so good ground
from which to counsel you as to your intercourse
with the world of pleasure. If I were to put
this matter to you on the ground of men's rules
and decrees, if I were to try and show you, by
subtle hair-splitting, that this thing is one degree
more capable of abuse than that thing; and that,
therefore, you may use that, and must abandon
this, I should expose myself to merciless logic, and
to just ridicule. I leave this ground entirely. I
put myself on God's word, and say to you this
morning, be not conformed to this world. I say
to you as the first, the indispensable requisite for
deciding in what conformity consists, see that
your relations to Christ are properly adjusted.
Present yourselves living sacrifices to him. Be
transformed by the renewing of your mind.
Submit your will to the will of God without
reserve. Then shall you be able to prove
what is his will, what is good and acceptable
and perfect. Then shall your judgment be
so enlightened as to enable you to render a
reasoning, a reasonable, a thoughtful and discriminating
service. This is the first thing.
</p>

<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<p>
For this I pray for you. For this I am anxious
for you, that you be vitally united to Christ; that
you have a living, active faith in him; a clear
witness of your acceptance with him, an ever
burning love for him. If you have these, I
know that the details of your lives, whether
they concern your pleasures, or your business, or
your studies, will take care of themselves. But
remember this prerequisite. Do not go away
saying, <q>my pastor says I may lawfully indulge in
this or that, and I need give myself no further
trouble about it.</q> I say to you no such thing.
I say that you want your whole nature renewed
by the indwelling of Christ, and that without this
you are not safe in the world one moment. That
without this you are in continual danger of conformity
to the world. Without this you are in
no condition to decide in what you may engage,
or how far you may engage in it without abuse.
Withal, you <emph>will</emph> need to trouble yourself about
these matters; to study God's law; to watch
closely your own heart and life; to avoid needless
temptation; to exercise strong resolution when
pleasure beckons you beyond the bounds erected
by Christian duty. I bid you rejoice in your
youth. I bid you use those amusements which
are innocent in themselves, freely and with gratitude
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
to God, but to beware of their abuse. I
can safely tell you some things which God's
word will teach you as to this matter. It will
tell you that where you make pleasure the end
and rule of your life, and duty the exception,
you are guilty of abuse. It will tell you that
when pleasure saps the fountains of your health,
when it steals away your hours of sleep, and
tempts you to excessive indulgence of appetite
at an hour which nature prescribes for the rest
and recuperation of your organs, when it leads
you to expose yourself to sickness by inadequate
clothing—it is a gross abuse for which God will
hold you accountable. It will tell you that
when any description of pleasure trenches on
the limits of modesty, it is an abuse; that the
public embracing of young men and women in
the vile dances of the day, is an offense against
decency, an abomination against which manly
nobleness and maidenly delicacy ought to cry
out with all their power. It will tell you
that when pleasure of any kind interferes with
your covenant obligations to the church, and
keeps you from the ordinances of God's house, it
is an abuse; a conformity to the world, against
which God warns you in this text.
</p>

<p>
Come then and give yourselves to Christ, not
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
repelled by any false, ascetic views of his religion,
but believing, as his word entitles you to believe,
that it is the promoter of innocent joy, of
healthy and grateful recreation, of the highest
and purest pleasures. Come, and he shall show
you by his own life how to be in the world, yet
not of it. How to live in strictest conformity to
duty, and yet be free indeed, and exhibit to the
world a broad, noble, generous Christian life—a
life in the spirit and not in the letter. He shall
teach you to live by the insight of love, and not
by the prescriptions of a bare scheme of duty.
Oh, that you may grow to the stature of perfect
men and women in Christ; that you may be
living examples of a reasoning service, models
of a piety, enthusiastic yet judicious; all aglow
with the love of Christ carried into every detail
of your lives, into your pleasures, your conversation,
your business; bringing everything, great
and small, into conformity with the law of Christ,
and making the whole life move sweetly and
harmoniously round him. You will not then be
a worldly church. You will not then be stumbling
blocks to the kingdom of Christ. You will
be living epistles, read and known of all men,
and they, seeing your good works, shall glorify
your father which is in Heaven.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>The Church And The Young Man.</head>
<head type="sub">A Sermon Delivered on Sabbath Morning, November 4, 1866,</head>
<head type="sub">In The First Presbyterian Church, Troy,</head>
<head type="sub">At The Request of The Young Men's Christian Association.</head>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<quote rend="display">
2 Sam. xviii, 5. <q><hi rend='italic'>And the king commanded Joab
and Abishai and Ittai saying, deal gently for my sake
with the young man, even with Absalom.</hi></q>
</quote>

<p>
There are few passages of Holy writ more
beautiful or suggestive than this. Notwithstanding
the astounding character of Absalom's rebellion;
though the mind of the sovereign and father
of his people is torn with indignation at this
outrage upon his throne and person, and is busy
with plans for the security of his kingdom and
the repulse of the invader; though David is
stunned and bewildered at this high handed display
of ingratitude and rebellion on the part of
his favorite child, the father finds place to assert
itself amid the cares of the sovereign, and to
breathe a word of caution to his generals respecting
the person of his dearly loved boy.
</p>

<p>
In accordance with the request of the Young
Men's National Christian Convention to the
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
churches, I propose to devote this service to a
discussion of their relations to the church. I take
this text as setting forth a similar charge given
by our Lord and King Christ to his militant
church, to deal gently with the young man. I
therefore invite your attention to the following
points respecting the relations of young men to
the church:
</p>

<lg>
<l>I. The church <emph>must</emph> deal with them.</l>
<l>II. The church <emph>ought</emph> to deal with them.</l>
<l>III. How the church should deal with them.</l>
</lg>

<p>I. <hi rend='italic'>The church must deal with young men.</hi></p>

<p>
Absalom, however foolish and wicked his
revolt, however strange his rebellion against his
royal father, notwithstanding his youth and inexperience,
was a stubborn fact, with which the
leaders and counselors and armies of the kingdom
found themselves obliged to deal. Otherwise
David would have been dethroned and his
authority violently usurped. If not dealt with so
as to suppress him, he must be dealt with in the
more unpleasant capacity of a suppressor and
tyrant.
</p>

<p>
Young men are a fact in society; and as such
cannot be without relations to the church. Not
only so, they are an important fact; a prominent
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
fact; a potent fact. They are a force in the business,
the social, the political, the governmental
relations of the community. If they have not
wisdom, they have strength and energy. If they
have not caution, they have enterprise. If they
have not experience, they have tact, intelligence
and knowledge. If they refuse to follow old
rules, they succeed ofttimes in the use of their
own methods. Society concedes much to them,
entrusts them with serious responsibilities, seeks
them for positions of power and influence, is
powerfully swayed in whatever direction they
choose, as a body, to throw themselves, applauds
and welcomes their success.
</p>

<p>
The relations of such a body to the church of
Christ must be important. This mass of manly
strength, energy, independence, intelligence and
enterprise must, if set on fire with Christian ardor
and enlisted on her behalf, greatly conduce to her
prosperity; while it cannot but be a serious hindrance
to her success if this element is neutral,
or arrayed against her. If neutral, indeed, it is
against her. If she have not the young men
incorporated with her membership, at work in
her sabbath schools, in regular attendance on her
ordinances, woven into her social relations, throwing
their strength and generosity and enthusiasm
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
into her benevolent enterprises, contributing their
fresh thought to her assemblies, working, through
the closer intimacies which mark their age, to
increase her numbers, she will have to move
under the drag applied by their indifference, resist
their fascinations exerted in drawing others away
from her standard, contend sharply against the
skepticism to which youth is naturally prone, and
if they are won at last, win them when the freshness
of youth is gone, and by a double expenditure
of power. The church <emph>must</emph> deal with them
as the friends or as the enemies of religion; must
appropriate or resist their power. They come to
her in the flush of their manly strength, like the
Roman envoys to Carthage, holding in their robes
peace and war, and offering the church her
choice.
</p>

<p>II. <hi rend='italic'>The church ought to deal with them.</hi></p>

<p>
1. In simple consistency with her own principles.
Not only to touch them where she must,
but where she can. Not to regard them as aside
from her peculiar work, but as constituting a
peculiarly important and interesting part of her
work. She professes to labor for the salvation
of men, where can she find excuse for failing to
provide <emph>special</emph> appliances if need be, for the salvation
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
of young men? She professes to be an <emph>educator</emph>
as well as an evangelizer. Here is material
in its most inviting shape, and at the stage best
adapted for her moulding. She professes to provide
for the extension of her doctrine and spirit.
Can she, with any show of reason, neglect the
force furnished her in this mass of youthful
energy and enthusiasm. She professes to rescue
men from danger. Does she see any danger
more imminent than those which menace young
men, any temptations more seductive, any ruin
more pitiable? Does she see any more susceptible
of these influences than youth with their high
spirits, superfluous energy and glowing passion?
Does she see any victims which appeal more
powerfully to her compassion than these sons and
brothers in whose success and virtue are bound up
the hopes and affections of thousands of parents,
every one of whom cries to the world and to the
church, <q>deal gently for my sake with the young
man?</q>
</p>

<p>
2. But the church ought to deal with them,
in the absence of other appliances to reach
them. The church has few enough, far too
few; but there are fewer elsewhere. Take business.
What does it furnish? It deals with the
young man. Not always gently either. It deals
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
with his youthful strength; with his clear and
active brain; with his enterprise and energy. It
uses these to build up trade and accumulate
wealth. It deals, I say, not always gently. It is
often exacting and severe. It often binds burdens
too heavy for youthful shoulders. It often
refuses leisure which health imperatively demands,
and denies compensations which might
furnish less temptation to crime. But I am not
here to speak of these now. How does it deal
with the young man morally? Does business
take into the account, to any great extent, the fact
that young men are moral and intellectual beings?
How much leisure does it afford them for mental
or religious culture? Alas, with the most charitable
view of the case, with the noble exceptions
clearly recognized, business presents a sad aspect
in this regard. The maxim <q><hi rend='italic'>business is
business</hi></q> is carried too far. What the <emph>world</emph> may
think or do in this matter is not the question
here; but to Christian men, who believe or profess
to believe that religion belongs everywhere,
business should be something more than business.
How many Christian business men recognize in
its contact opportunities for the exertion of
Christian influence as well as for making money?
How many see in their clerks something besides
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
the hired arms or brains to carry on their trade?
How many recognize them as beings with social
instincts as well as with sharp wits; immortal souls
as well as clear heads; susceptibilities to temptation
as well as to self-interest; young men who
are to fill a place in these democratic communities,
to cast their votes, exert their influence, be each
the centre of a greater or smaller circle, be fathers
to train up children and perpetuate their own
moral character and sentiments whatever they
be? How many consider the influence which
their position of employer gives them over the
moral destiny of these youth; the power they
may wield through the truly affectionate and
confidential relations subsisting between them?
How many concern themselves as to where their
clerks go after business hours, what associations
they form, whether they have a place of worship
or not? How many of you business men, here
to-day, are in the habit of asking the young
men in your employ to accompany you to church,
or to Bible class, or to prayer-meeting?
</p>

<p>
Take the community at large. <emph>Its</emph> influence,
if exerted in this direction, must be chiefly confined
to furnishing some counter attraction,
moral, but not necessarily religious, to the attractions
of the haunts of sin. And a great
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
work can be done here, in which men of the
most opposite religious theories, and men with
no religion at all can unite. There, for instance,
is the temperance question. There is a variety
of views on the subject; but all agree that intemperance
is an awful evil, and one which all
moral and religious men are called on to resist
and suppress by every possible means. <emph>We</emph> believe
that the only effectual method of reforming
a drunkard, or of keeping a man from becoming
one, is to make him a Christian. That will
reform in <emph>all</emph> respects. But we cannot bring the
community to agree on this platform. Here
then is one where all can unite, namely, in organizing
some force to overbalance the attractions
of the dram shop. It need not be distinctively
religious, only free from vicious associations. The
saloon keeper understands perfectly that not one
young man in ten comes to his haunt originally
to drink or in which to gamble. He wants a
warm and pleasant room to sit down and chat with
his companion; to read his evening paper, or it
may be to procure a meal. So this minister of
corruption proceeds to make provision for these
natural and healthy cravings, that, through them,
he may excite those unnatural and depraved
desires, the satisfaction of which constitutes his
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
chief source of profit. He furnishes his rooms
tastefully and comfortably. He provides food of
all kinds prepared to please the most fastidious
palate. A small sum will secure a quiet and
cosy retreat where the youth and his friends
may pass an evening. But he furnishes the
bar with its tempting array of liquors. He
gathers there his array of well dressed and
gentlemanly confederates who are always ready
to challenge to drink, and to sneer at the principle
which refuses. He has his licentious pictures
to stimulate the passions, and abundant facilities
for their gratification. And thousands of youths
who went thither at first, only because they could
find no other retreat, have come at last to frequent
it for the gratification of the basest
appetites, and have gone from its doors at last,
hopeless, homeless drunkards.
</p>

<p>
Now suppose a community should say (and no
individual with a shadow of moral sense could
say otherwise), the rumseller takes an unfair
advantage. He unites things which may just as
well be separated. There is no necessity that
all the light and comfort and retirement should
be associated with liquor and licentiousness.
Let us furnish these to the hundreds of poor
young men who have no retreat but their offices
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
and boarding houses. Let us build a house or
hire a large suite of rooms. Let us have a suitable
person employed to dispense proper refreshments
at a reasonable price. Let us have a
reading room furnished with the best papers and
periodicals, and with a good library. Let us
have a conversation room, where young men
can chat or play their game of chess or backgammon.
Let us have a ten pin alley, and even
a smoking room. Would not this be in the
interest of temperance as well as of many other
virtues? Would it not keep scores of young
men from the gin palaces? Could not society,
independently of any religious views, easily inaugurate
and carry out such a plan? It has
been done, and has worked wonders. The
slight approach towards it made by our Young
Men's Christian Association, saying nothing
now of the religious adjuncts, has proved
what a strong, well organized effort might
effect in this direction. And yet what has our
communities of this character? What organized
appliance have our cities anywhere to act upon
young men? There I know are the Young Men's
Associations, and they are good as far as they go;
but they make provision chiefly for intellectual
wants. Their libraries, and reading rooms, and
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
lecture courses are doing a good work; but after
all it is for the community at large, male and
female, as well as for young men. There is a
lower class of wants peculiar to young men, and
to young men of a certain class, which will be
supplied somehow, and which a proper effort
may supply judiciously, without injury to the
youth, and in a way to create wants and lead to
associations of a higher character. If the moral
and Christian part of the community do not
supply them, the immoral part will.
</p>

<p>
3. But the church ought to deal with young
men, <emph>because she has the means</emph>. She has organization.
The community at large is not organized
to carry out such efforts. Special organizations
have to be made when such a movement is
undertaken by it; and even then the <emph>personal
sympathy</emph> and cooperation of individuals, except
perhaps through their purses, is not secured. A
moral movement agitated outside the church
requires a good deal of time and effort to bring
it into contact with men's minds, and to get
them enlisted in it. It has to work principally
upon individuals. But the moment a question
of moral reform starts with the church, it works
from the very first upon and through an organization.
That is the reason why the agents
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
of all great benevolent enterprises and reform
movements try first to get before the churches.
The subject is presented to masses. It reaches
the larger part of the community through their
religious detachments, so to speak, and by the
mouth of their chosen and respected religious
instructors. The organization is already formed
to discuss the question, to decide upon it, to
raise means for carrying out the enterprise, to
delegate men to represent this or that branch
of the church in it. Added to this is the
personal sympathy evoked. As a moral question
it is brought home to the church on her own
ground. If it concerns the salvation of men,
every individual, as well as the church at large has
to do with it. It appeals to him as a man and as a
brother; to his prayers, to his pocket, to his effort.
</p>

<p>
The church has the wealth. I need only say,
that the church represents by far the largest
proportion of the money of our communities.
Take our own city for instance, and count up
our wealthiest men, and you will find that the
most of them are not only members of congregations,
but also members of churches.
</p>

<p>
4. The church ought to deal with young
men, <emph>because she represents the only restraining and
reforming power</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>

<p>
No reform that is not Christian in its essence
is radical. No restraint that is not Christian is
permanently effective. Other influences are partial
in their operation. They modify one side
of character. They protect it partially at one
or two weak points. They touch the outward
developments of the life merely; trying to regulate
it from the circumference. This goes to the
very seat of life, purges the fountain head of
impulse and desire, creates a new man to do
new works, and does not simply ingraft new
works on the old character, putting the new
piece into the old garment. This brings the
thought and will into conformity with the law
of Christ, and develops the man <emph>as a whole</emph>,
makes him something, as well as restrains him
from evil. Without this, who can say that any
restraint will be effectual; that any memories
will be sacred enough, any admonitions forcible
enough, any associations attractive enough, any
moral purpose strong enough to keep one pure?
Alas, the shore of life is strewn so thickly with
wrecks of youthful hope and promise, the annals
of crime embrace so many youth of noble aims
and high attainments, reared under the holiest
influences of home and sanctuary, that we may
well ask—who is safe?
</p>

<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>

<p>
While then, I would not discourage an effort
at reform made in good faith by society, yet
without any distinctively religious character,
while I believe that many such efforts have
done good in their sphere, I say distinctly, that
their sphere is not large enough. Their influence
does not reach deep enough. They help
reform or restrain certain developments of the
life; but they do not inaugurate any positive
moral development. Nay, the very fact that
many of them are forced, as a condition of their
existence, to denude themselves of anything but
the most general and vague religious character,
makes them incapable of fostering any high
moral development. To take the instance cited
a few moments since. The community establishes
a coffee room, or reading room, or resort
of any kind for young men, without the vicious
attractions of the fashionable restaurant or saloon.
It does a good and laudable thing. Its influence
is good as far as it goes, in keeping young men
away from worse places. But the moral influence
exerted, depends entirely upon these outside
appliances. In other words, this institution
keeps them from evil so long as they can have
recourse to it, but does not implant within them
a principle which, in the event of their being
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
deprived of this privilege, would cause them to
forego their comfort and recreation, rather than
seek them amid debasing associations.
</p>

<p>
On this point then I am avaricious. I want
the church to control all schemes of reform. I
want them to originate in the church as their
only legitimate source, so that in every effort put
forth for the protection, or restoration, or training
of youth, the gospel of Christ, the only power
which can ever thoroughly regenerate individual
or society, may be paramount: so that the effort
may be not only a conservative but an aggressive
force, winning youth to Christ as well as keeping
them away from Satan, creating positive developments
of character as well as securing simple
safety or harmlessness, narrowing the boundaries
of the devil's empire as well as keeping Christ's
from infringement. For this reason I am anxious
that instead of its being left for secular organizations
to inaugurate such movements, the church
should enlarge her Christian organizations so as
to take in and sanctify every force that is requisite
to meet the demands of the various characters
with which she has to deal.
</p>

<p>
And just at this point, I want to call your
attention to a thought which bears especially
upon our city churches.
</p>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<p>
It is commonly thought that the city is the
fountain head of all vice, and with some reason
I admit. Parents have a traditional horror of
sending their sons into large cities. They think
they are going into the very jaws of death and
destruction. They draw a fearful picture of the
gayeties and the temptations of city life. They
look upon young men reared in cities with suspicion.
They are inclined to regard them all as
loose in morals, and as taking naturally to sin.
</p>

<p>
Now I do not believe that, as a rule, young men
or any other men are worse in cities than elsewhere.
Sin is pretty much the same thing, I apprehend,
among grain and trees, as it is on sidewalks.
Propensities just as vicious, passions just as
furious and debased, exhibitions of vice quite as
disgusting, more so, perhaps, because more coarse
and pronounced, are to be seen in farming districts
and in country villages as in cities. The
appliances of vice are quite up to the proportion
of the population in the former, both in quantity
and in quality. A good deal of injustice is done
the city in this respect. It is often said that a
young man's ruin commences from the time he
leaves his quiet country home and goes to the
city. But the fact is that, in many cases, the city
only completes what was well begun at home,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
begun in evenings spent in country grocery
stores, and on the piazzas of village taverns.
</p>

<p>
But there is another aspect of this matter
which would perhaps startle those who think
that all piety and orthodoxy reside in the rural districts;
and that is, that the city, <emph>as it is</emph>, affords far
greater encouragements to well developed piety
than the country; and that if the church were
fully awake to her duty towards young men, and
actually employing all the means afforded her by
her wealth, organization and influence to shield,
restrain, influence and reform them, the city
would be the safest place on earth for a youth.
If the city is the stronghold of vice, it is in the
church's power to make it the stronghold of
virtue. For it is admitted that, in other respects,
the city affords superior advantages. Young
men leave the country store and come thither if
they desire to learn business on a large scale.
They are obliged to seek the city for large
literary opportunities. The great popular literary
attractions seldom move out of the track of the
cities. Here the pulse of life beats quicker.
Men live faster. Thought is more energetic and
prompt. The same is in a measure true of
religious life. It develops more activity, more
benevolence. It invests religious instruction with
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
more attractions, and throws more life and power
into social worship. Go into such a prayer meeting,
for instance, as you can find in scores of
churches in our large cities, where the large
numbers present augment the sympathy of each
with the common object, where thoughtful,
practical, energetic men pour into the common
treasury streams of fresh, living thought,
where the singing is an inspiration, and say what
you will, a man will be stirred and stimulated as
he cannot be in the thin assemblies of too many
country churches, where the minister is chiefly
depended on to give interest to the meeting,
where the singing is faint and slow. I know
God is often in the one place as in the other. I
know there is true religious life there, and that
souls are converted there. But so long as men
remain human, their piety will not be insensible
to such influences. So too, the influences of the
city churches tend more to develop young men.
My impression is that in country districts age is
a prime qualification for responsibility; young
men are kept back, and not expected to bear a
prominent part in religious services until later in
life. With us, it is part of our creed to educate
young men by responsibility. We love to hear
them speak or pray, not only because they bring
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
us good and fresh and profitable thoughts, but
because we know that these exercises are developing
them into strong men for the future leaders
of the church. Not only so, but our larger religious
machinery, the wider sphere of our activity,
furnish places for them to work. We must depend
largely upon them to carry on our mission schools,
and to carry out other practical schemes of benevolence.
Under these influences, I say, they develop
faster, and as I think better. As a rule, the
young man of a city church is more capable,
more efficient, than one of the same age and of
equal natural abilities in a rural district.
</p>

<p>
But then these influences do not reach the
class of unconverted youth directly. They have
no interest in prayer meetings, little in sermons.
This is the plain question before us then:
</p>

<p>III. <hi rend='italic'>How shall the church deal with the Absaloms</hi>:
the erring youth or those of no religious bias,
the careless and pleasure loving? <emph>There is such a
class.</emph> Are you surprised at my stating a fact
which seems self evident? I state it because it
seems to have been practically forgotten. Some
men frame their schemes of reform on the principle
that every one must be appealed to by the
same influences which appeal to them. For instance,
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
when it is proposed to furnish, under
Christian supervision, certain innocent appliances
which may counterbalance the attractions of the
saloon, and perhaps lead to the exercise of
some more distinctively religious influence,
we are flatly told by some that there is no need
of recreation. Youth are on the brink of the
grave, and should find enjoyment in singing
psalms. Others tell us there is recreation enough
in the contemplation of the heavenly bodies,
and of the beauties of nature, and that these
ought to satisfy the soul without its having recourse
to lower joys. Now you and I like to
sing psalms. They are suggestive to us of many
rich and comforting thoughts. Some of you can
find sufficient enjoyment in the beauties of nature,
not only because God has opened your eyes to
see him in all things, but because study and
knowledge have prepared your mind to discern
and appreciate the wonders of creation. I don't
think you particularly loved to sing psalms before
Christ touched your heart. And the practical
point we have got to meet, and meet as Christians
and with Christian methods is, that there
is a large class that cannot be appealed to by the
beauties of nature and the charms of literature,
and the glory of the starry heavens. Have we
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
anything to do with these? Just as indubitably
as David's army had to do with the erring Absalom.
And we have got to deal gently with them
too; not force them upon the procrustean bed of
our methods, and give them their choice of these
or none. If the church says to these unconverted,
careless ones, <q>If you will not come to our prayer
meetings, if you will not listen to our sermons,
we have done our duty and cleared our skirts,
and you may go on to perdition as fast as you
please,</q> I say the church is awfully in error. Her
skirts, are in that event, soaked with the blood of
ruined youth, and it cries aloud against her from
the ground.
</p>

<p>
What are we to do then? If the church
has a duty to this class, has she also means to
discharge it? Is it in her power to make the city
the best place for irreligious as well as for pious
youth? I say, yes. But she will be obliged to
enlarge her scheme of work. She must sanctify
new forces to this end, if she has to take them
out of the devil's hand. She must institute new
attractions, under her own control, to draw youth
within the sphere of her influence, and to hold
them when drawn. She must employ forces with
a view merely to restrain from worse influences,
until she can bring direct religious influences to
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
bear. Without compromising principle one iota,
abstaining from the very appearance of evil, she
is nevertheless to press into her service everything
that she can separate from low associations, everything
that will enhance her own social attractions,
everything which will amuse, interest, instruct,
to keep these away from the palaces of hell, and to
draw them into contact with the influences of the
gospel. The wisdom of Christianity is shown
in its dealing with men as they are. In reaching
them at their own level; and the church will
best show her wisdom by not trying to be wiser
than her Lord. The mountain will not go to
Mahomet, and Mahomet must go to the mountain.
We have a variety of characters to deal
with, and must use a variety of means. Gather
such a band of youth together, and preach to
them that they ought to be satisfied with the
beauties of nature, or with books, or the like, and
you simply drive them the faster from religious
influences, and cut every tie between you. Here
is one young man who loves books. Let the
church give him books. Let him know that he
receives this high and pure pleasure from the
hand of Christianity. Here is another that loves
pictures. Let Christian art adorn the walls, and
Christian liberality pay the price. But here is
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
another of a lower grade of culture. Not vicious,
not specially inclined to dissipation, but finding
little interest in books or pictures. Throw him
among these higher influences, of course, for they
will insensibly educate him; but if a checker
board or a game of dominoes will attract him, and
keep him for an evening away from the liquor
saloon or the theatre, pray tell me why Christian
hands should not furnish him these, and a
pleasant, quiet place in which to play his innocent
game, where no profanity greets his ears, where no
bar presents its seductions. Another loves music;
why should not Christian liberality furnish him
the gratification of this taste, and Christian hands
and voices join with him in swelling the harmony
in which his heart delights?
</p>

<p>
It is, of course, impossible for me to go into
details here, but the general principle I think is
clear. It seems to me that the only way in
which the church can reach any large proportion
of these young men, is by the judicious
union of attractive and direct influences; by
bringing under her own control and using all
those appliances which appeal to the social
instinct, to the taste, to the intellect, to the
necessity for recreation, freeing them from debasing
associations, and thereby drawing the
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
unconverted youth within the range of direct
religious influences. She must be content to
keep them out of the hands of evil for the time,
if she cannot fully commit them to piety. But
then, let it be clearly understood that these
things are to be under the control of religion.
That the <emph>salvation</emph> of the young men is the great
end toward which these are only means. The
moment our Young Men's Christian Associations,
to which we must chiefly look to carry out
this plan, let their rooms become mere lounging
places; the moment the prayer meeting is
dropped; the moment the young men cease to be
on the watch for opportunities to speak the word
of religious counsel, that moment they are no
longer the allies of the church; they will have
become no better than clubs. I want to say to the
young men of our own association who have so
boldly and, thus far, so successfully carried out
this theory, you must guard yourselves here.
The Troy Association has drawn the eyes of the
church throughout a large part of the country
upon itself by its course in this matter. It is
thought by many a bold experiment. By many
it is openly denounced. Many predict that the
result will be the ruin instead of the salvation of
young men. If you would silence and convert
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
your opponents, if you would convert the wavering
into enthusiastic supporters of your policy,
guard well the religious side of your work. Infuse
the gospel spirit into everything. Strictly
enforce the rules which Christian prudence lays
down for the use of means and attractions not distinctively
religious. Let the word <emph>Christian</emph> be
in the largest letters on your sign. Remember
your great object, the duty thrown upon you by
the nature of the case, thrown upon you by similarity
of age, by congeniality of taste and pursuits,
thrown upon you by the church, thrown
upon you by Christ; the church's head, is the
<emph>salvation</emph>, not the entertainment of the young
men. You use these appliances to entertain,
only that thereby you may bring other forces to
bear, which may make them Christians, add their
power to the various churches of the community,
and unite them with you in the work of saving
others. The moment you forget this, Ichabod
will be written upon your banners, and the cause
of Christ receive a blow which all the good you
have heretofore accomplished can scarcely heal.
</p>

<p>
The practical working of this theory is the
best answer to its opponents. We have this
answer among us to-day, and I am thankful from
my inmost heart that the Young Men's Christian
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
Association is to-day, what it was not two years
ago, among the great religious forces of our city.
Those who have opposed its later proceedings
have some stubborn facts to get round. These
facts demonstrate this: that since the Young
Men's Christian Association inaugurated the
policy of <emph>attracting</emph> youth to its head-quarters, its
<emph>distinctively religious force has increased ten-fold</emph>.
As one evidence of this, the city missionary says,
<q>since we entered upon our present plan, a larger
number of young men than ever before have been
brought to sympathize with me and my work, are
ready to sit up with the sick, to visit the needy,
to labor for the spiritual good of their fellows.
Our rooms have resulted in increasing the effective
force of spiritual co-laborers with me, more
than <emph>ten-fold</emph>.</q> Last month, the daily prayer
meeting from twelve to one, was attended by
an average of twenty-two daily, mostly young
persons, and generally conducted by young men
converted under the agency of the association.
Some of you remember the old noonday prayer
meeting, and to such I need say nothing as to
the contrast. The call for this noonday meeting
was signed by about fifty young men. The call
itself was drawn and circulated by a young man
who, six months ago, came to our city penniless,
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
was made to feel at home in our rooms, was
furnished with employment by the agencies of
the association, came to the weekly prayer meeting,
was converted, and is now counted among
our most earnest Christian workers. Young
men are being converted through this agency.
I give you one instance out of a number. A
young man visited the rooms on Thursday night,
and was invited with others down to the young
men's prayer meeting. He went, and was deeply
interested, and immediately after the meeting
returned to the parlor, and was seen earnestly
studying a Bible at one of the reading tables. At
the hour of closing, some of the Christian young
men accompanied him home, and urged upon
him the subject of personal religion. They followed
him up for two or three days, until he gave
his heart to God; and he has since been an active
co-laborer with the young men in the work of the
association.
</p>

<p>
One more incident. A young man came to
one of the members of this church sometime
since, saying, <q>I came to the city two years ago.
I was a member of a church at home; but here,
no man seemed to care for my soul. I have
neglected my duty, have sought for no church
home; but I was attracted to your rooms. I
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
went to the association prayer meeting. My
heart was stirred, and I became ashamed of my
neglect and inconsistency; and now I want to
know when your next communion season is, that
I may give my letter to your pastor.</q>
</p>

<p>
I could give you others, but these speak volumes
for the value of this policy; and, from the
bottom of my heart this morning, I say God
bless the Young Men's Christian Association,
and pledge them my poor efforts and influence,
and prayers to help forward the work so nobly
begun.
</p>

<p>
I know not where to stop. My heart is so full
that it seems as if I could spend the day on this
theme. But I must stop, and, in conclusion I
say, first to the church, accept frankly the responsibility
which God throws on you in the
persons of these young men. You are the appointed
agency, the proper agency, and the only
agency to save and restrain and protect them.
You cannot shirk it, especially as city churches.
Into these centres of trade and education God
pours the young men, and he asks you and me
this morning if we are ready for them; if, while
business and education are multiplying their
facilities, the gospel of Christ, represented by the
churches, is multiplying its facilities to make the
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
city the <emph>best place</emph> for the education of young men
in virtue. He asks these churches if there is
nothing significant, no message to her in the concentration
of the mass of our young men and the
mass of Christian culture, organized power, and
wealth, at one point? Have these things no
relation to each other? Yes, brethren, they have.
There is no evading it. The finger of Providence
points unswervingly to these city churches
as the great sources of Christian influence upon
young men. Let us not fail to hear these voices.
The ten thousand appliances of vice, confronting
the church with brazen defiance, or with devilish
ingenuity and secresy sapping the foundations of
manly honor and integrity, call to us, deal gently
with the young man. Fathers and mothers, the
yearnings of whose hearts you read full easily in
your love for your own sons, whose happiness,
whose very lives are bound up in the honor and
prosperity of these sons and brothers, call to us
from their distant homes in quiet villages, and on
the open farm lands, call to us with agonizing
earnestness—deal gently for our sakes with the
young man. Our community, our country, calls
to us. Oh, when I look upon society and see
what characters ride rampant there, when I look
at government and see the awful corruption
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
festering there, when I see how men in power,
from the chief magistrate of the nation down to
the humblest postmaster, will sell their souls for
party, and betray their country to its enemies
through lust of power, or something else, God
knows what; when I see drunkenness holding
high carnival in the nation's capitol, reeling in
the seat of the President, and retailing its maudlin
declamation before a sickened country from
Washington to Chicago, I can only turn to God
and the future. Our only hope is in the work of
the Christian church through all its agencies,
social, ecclesiastical and educational, moulding
out of the glorious material so abundantly at its
disposal, a band of men who shall convert the
seats of power into seats of righteousness, and
make government and purity synonymous terms.
The young men themselves appeal to us. This
mass of intelligence, clear wit, energy, tact, education;
these noble brows on which God has set
the seal of power; these frank, manly, generous
natures, these enthusiastic impulses, all speak to
us, saying, deal gently with us, and teach us by
the power of Christian love how to use our
power; they speak to us, and warn us against
letting so much power and energy and culture
be turned against us, or left to hang as a drag
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
on our wheels. And Christ speaks to the church,
Christ who loves these young men, Christ who
died for these young men; Christ who from his
seat of glory at the Father's right hand, yearns
over these young men, Christ is calling to his
church to-day, to you, to me, to all the pastors
and congregations of this city, <q><emph>take care of them,
take care of them, deal gently for MY sake with the
young men</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Christian young men, you have heard the call,
and in some sort are obeying it. In proportion
as you have not feared to use the range of
gospel agencies, in proportion as your love has
been kindled for the souls of these youths, and
your hands and tongues have been devoted to
this end, God has blessed you. Go on as you
have begun. Go on, not defiantly, but firmly,
boldly, prudently. Dare to be singular, if it will
compass your end. Take the word of God as
your highest authority. Use no means that is
not sanctioned by it. Use none of doubtful
expediency, but enlarge the range of your agencies.
Wrest from the devil attractions which
belong to you rather than to him. Leaven them.
Separate them from the debasing associations with
which sin has identified them, and in the name
of Christ your Master, set up your banners, rally
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
your forces and join the churches in their work
of salvation.
</p>

<p>
And you, unconverted young men, one word to
you. For your own souls' sake, for the sake of
your best interests, for the sake of the parents
who love and hope in you, for the sake of your
country, for Christ's sake, deal gently with yourselves.
Remember, the only true manhood is
Christian manhood. No restraints which the
church can throw round you will ensure your
safety against temptation; no strength of resolution
on your part will keep you pure, if you be
not the children of Christ. Come to Jesus.
Come this very morning. Come and learn of
him. He will deal very gently with you. His
yoke is easy, his burden is light. The life he
gives you is full of the highest impulses and of the
purest enjoyments—a living spring of water—and
the eternal rewards he promises are such as
eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart
of man conceived.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Thoughts For The Clergy on the Amusement Question.</head>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<p>
As pastors, we can no longer evade this question.
Our people are hearing, reading, and
being influenced by discussions of the subject in
various quarters. Obviously, we must not let
our congregations form their conclusions on so
important a matter, independently of their chosen
spiritual guides. The word of each pastor will
carry with it, in most cases, a weight which can
attach to no other's word. Let us see to it that
we separate ourselves, as much as possible, from
prejudice in our examination of this question.
Let us face the facts fairly, and inquire what provision
is furnished by the gospel to meet them.
We have nothing to do with any other consideration.
Whether the gospel principles and methods
applicable to this case appear to us safe or unsafe,
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
we have no right to advocate any other. We
have no right to be silent.
</p>

<p>
What are the facts?
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The youth, as a class, are vitally important to
the church and to the state.</hi> Our work as Christian
teachers reaches beyond our own generation.
We owe to the future the proper training of the
men and women who are to mould its destinies.
The present youth are the future leaders of
church and state. How they shall lead them,
depends very much upon us. These truths are
self-evident.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>They are exposed to peculiar dangers calling for
special effort on their behalf.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Special efforts are being made to ruin them.
The self-interest of vice is interested in this
work; for to youth its appliances look chiefly
for support. As one has happily expressed it,
<q>Age has few passions to which profligacy can
appeal; and the proselytism of decrepitude and
years are enlistments of little value.</q> The withdrawal
of young men from the rolls of the intemperate
and licentious, would leave two-thirds
of the drinking saloons and brothels bankrupt.
The passions to which these appliances appeal
are such as are most active and dangerous in
youth. They offer the freedom and license
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
which youth loves. They throw off the shackles
which youth hates. Our cities and villages
swarm with traps set expressly for them. Thousands
are freely expended to invest the bar room
and the gambling hall with the cozy attractions
of the parlor. The harlot's palace opens wide its
doors. The public ball room displays its fascinations.
Dissipation draws round itself the attractions
of wealth and taste and fashion, and in its
splendid club rooms secures for itself the pleasures
which expediency forbids it to seek more
publicly. Vice literally flaunts its banners in the
face of the public. But a few days since I saw
from my window a banner carried through the
streets, blazoned with the name and attractions
of one of the vilest fashionable groggeries in the
city, and preceded by the music of a drum and
fife. The snug retreat, known only to the initiated
few, where licentiousness and drunkenness
are secluded, and thousands lost and won, was
never more popular than now. Practiced decoys
lie in wait for the daughters of our families, and
the whirl of general society in which so many of
them, at a tender age, are madly revolving night
after night, is no poor preparation for the fatal
success of these wiles. Young girls, who come
from quiet country homes to seek employment,
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
cast adrift on these surging tides of life without a
friend or an adviser, readily fall victims to the
wiles of young seducers whose social position
ensures their security. In a certain city, I was
informed not long since, of one keeper of a
fashionable brothel who had removed her trade,
because it was too largely usurped by victims of
this class to render it any longer profitable.
Young men, too, are coming to the cities in
crowds, to engage in business or study. They
must have society and recreation; and the votaries
of vice are sparing neither pains nor expense to
give them abundance of both, fraught with ruin
to soul and body.
</p>

<p>
Without going outside of our special sphere as
pastors, viewing this subject solely with reference
to the youth of our congregations, as, in common
with others subjected to these and other temptations,
<emph>what ought to be our influence in arresting and
counteracting these evils</emph>?
</p>

<p>
It ought to be second to none but parental
influence. If the name pastor mean anything,
our position as the chosen religious teachers of
congregations ought to give us free access to
every household in our flocks, and the strongest
influence over the youth whose moral training
we directly or indirectly shape. We ought to
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
be not only <emph>respected</emph> and <emph>reverenced</emph>, but so loved
as to be the familiar advisers and confidants of
the youth of our charges. Our word ought,
next to the parents', to have weight in turning
them from improper courses and associations,
and in keeping them from such. Moreover, our
influence ought not to be merely restrictive and
admonitory. We should be sufficiently in sympathy
with them, familiar enough with the demands
of their age and with the best means of
satisfying them, to be able to offer positive suggestions
respecting their employments, recreations,
society, reading, and the like. If we
sustain proper relations to the youth of our
charges, they will be as likely to refer such questions
to us, as matters of theology or practical
morality.
</p>

<p>
Now, the question of the amusements of our
youth is as good a test question in this matter as
we need ask. <emph>What, then, is the influence of the
clergy at large in regulating the diversions of the
youth?</emph>
</p>

<p>
I appeal to the experience of the mass of ministers,
not with the few <emph>special friends</emph> and admirers,
which most of them have among the young
people of their congregations, but with the <emph>mass
of the youth</emph>. I appeal to those judicious, farseeing
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
Christians, who are wont to observe carefully
the tendencies of society, <emph>if this influence is
not a comparative nullity</emph>. In a question which,
perhaps, as much as any other, concerns the
welfare of our youth, which has the most vital
relations to the attractions of home, which will
enter, whether we may think it right or not, into
the considerations which influence the choice or
rejection of a religious life; at a point which the
ministers of vice are fortifying most strongly,
wresting the best diversions to themselves,
striving to make them peculiarly their own, and
to invest them permanently with associations
which shall exclude them from Christian homes;
here, I say, the Christian church, the appointed
regulator and instructor in the ethics of amusement,
is, to a great extent, <emph>at open issue with her
own intelligent youth, and practically powerless to execute
her own decrees</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It is well for us as ministers, to look this fact
squarely in the face, and to call things by their
right names. How many pastors are in the
confidence of their youth with respect to the
amusements of the latter? Is not the fact rather
that there is a tacit antagonism recognized between
the youth and the clergy on this subject,
an antagonism growing, too, every year less
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
tacit and more avowed? Can it be denied that
a very large proportion of our youth regard their
ministers as the foes to recreation, and would
sooner think of consulting them on any subject
than on this? Is it not the fact that while presbyteries
and conferences and conventions pass
long and stringent resolutions on the subject of
dancing and on the use of cards and billiards, multitudes
of Christian families practice dancing;
scores of them may be found playing whist at
their own firesides, and scores more with their
billiard rooms fitted up in their own houses? It
will not answer to say that those who practice
these things are backslidden in heart and worldly
minded, and that, if they were truly Christ's
children, they would neither practice nor desire
them. This is begging the whole question at
issue, and moreover is flatly contradicted by
facts. Many of those who engage in these recreations
are among the most devoted, enlightened,
faithful members and even ministers of our
churches. Is it not the fact, again, that the
pastors of these individuals would be very much
at a loss to administer discipline in such cases?
Do they not know that any attempt at authoritative
interference would be regarded as trenching
upon individual rights of conscience, and would
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
send scores of active and faithful members to
other communions? The truth is, and there is
no shirking it, that, in the cities especially, in the
largest and most powerful churches, the clergy are
practically brought to a stand in this matter.
They do not and cannot control it. A vast mass
of enlightened Christian sentiment is against their
attempts to enforce the traditional church doctrines
on this subject. Their people pay little or
no heed to the official utterances of church assemblies.
Many of them treat them with ridicule.
There is no denying these facts. Hundreds of
pastors are painfully impressed with them. The
church's position in this matter is most humiliating.
</p>

<p>
What then is the course of the clergy?
</p>

<p>
Some of them are more than half persuaded
that the more liberal view of their people is correct.
They fully sympathize, perhaps, with that
view, yet they remain silent. They cannot
conscientiously reprove; they refuse to come
boldly forward and define their position for fear
of awakening prejudice, or for fear their views
may be misunderstood or misconstrued. In short
they think it is not safe. And yet, all the while,
the initiated in the congregation know pretty well
the general drift of their minister's sentiments;
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
that, though he says little, he winks a tacit encouragement
to many indulgences which far over-step
the bounds of ancient orthodoxy. But is
<emph>this</emph> safe? Is it safe or honorable for the church
to be impotent to carry out her own dogmas?
Is it safe for her to be under the charge of inconsistency
from the world because her statute books
and the practice of her members are at open
variance? Is it safe for the views of an influential
Christian teacher to be known only generally
and vaguely, that his church and the world may
draw undue license therefrom? If he is convinced
that the church has been mistaken in this matter,
and has in past years committed herself to undue
stringency, is it safe to let the error remain untouched,
and going on working its pernicious consequences?
If the gospel teaches a larger liberty,
a broader conception of Christian living and
Christian enjoyment than the church has preached,
has that minister who conscientiously believes
the fact any right to withhold the truth because
he deems it unsafe, and to let a falsehood (as he
believes) gain currency and power, and forfeit
moreover the attraction presented to a sinful
world by his more cheering and liberal conception
of Christ's teachings? Not safe! Will not God
take care of his truth? Doubtless men will misconstrue
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
it. Doubtless they will wrest the preaching
of gospel liberty to the confirmation of
worldly license. But the greater the danger of
this, the more reason why the truth, the <emph>whole
truth</emph>, should be proclaimed loudly, boldly, distinctly,
frequently. When the water is first let
into a reservoir, it is apt to be very muddy; but
that is no reason why the reservoir should remain
dry forever. The water will settle by and by,
and the whole people be refreshed. If there is
truth in these more liberal views of amusement,
it is in vain for religious newspapers to shirk the
discussion of the question. It is in vain for influential
ministers to beg young men's Christian
conventions not to raise it. It is in vain for the
pulpit to preserve a discreet silence. The thing
will out. The truth will stay swathed in no cave
in the rock. The things that have been spoken
in the ear in closets will be proclaimed upon
the house tops. The Christian public will the
sooner attain correct views on this subject
through free discussion. If the thing be not of
God, it will sooner come to nought through this
process than through any other. But by their
love for souls, and by their sworn loyalty to God
and truth, let the clergy run the sword of the
Spirit through and through this matter, that
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
the world may know the truth and detect the
falsehood.
</p>

<p>
It is confessed by some that they have given
the subject no attention. They have accepted
the traditions of the church as they found them,
have preached and have tried to enforce them, or
else have settled down upon the assumption that
the matter is of minor importance. I simply
ask if this is justifiable in view of the facts;
in view of the contradictory position of the
church on this subject; in view of the important
part which amusements must play in the education
of youth; in view of their great and patent
abuses; in view of the point urged in these discourses
that many of the popular diversions of
the day may be wrested from the devil's hands
and turned to good purpose in keeping the young
from evil influences and associations?
</p>

<p>
Some <emph>positively refuse</emph> to consider the question
under any new aspect. It is settled, once and
for all. The books are balanced, shut and sealed.
The wisdom of a past generation exhausted the
question. Its dictum is to be received as gospel.
Little needs to be said here. Such declarations
demand the utmost stretch of Christian charity.
They betray an ignorance which, in a popular
teacher, is unpardonable, and a blind acquiescence
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
in the conclusions of the past which is
pitiable.
</p>

<p>
The truth, moreover, is not promoted, <emph>in any
direction</emph>, by abusing those of more liberal views
on this question. The man who conscientiously
believes them wrong, and boldly says so, and
does not simply declaim against them but opposes
them by fair argument drawn from scripture, is
to be honored. I would there were more such.
But it will not in the least tend to conciliate
favor for the more stringent aspect of the
question, for its advocates to cast slurs upon the
sincerity and piety of those who differ from
them, to announce them as corrupters of youth,
enemies of the church, underminers of pure religion,
and the like. The day for this has gone
by. The best men may differ even on this question,
which some think so firmly settled; and the
liberal view of this subject is supported by too
many shining names in the Christian ministry,
by too large a mass of Christian devotion and
consistency and learning and intelligence, to
entitle such assertions to any notice whatever.
The want of Christian charity which leads one
public teacher to asperse his brother's Christian
consistency and purity of motive upon such
grounds, is at least as reprehensible as the
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
holding of liberal sentiments on dancing or
billiards.
</p>

<p>
Once more. The pulpit, in some places,
though alive to the importance of the subject, is
holding sternly by its old, stringent views. It is
laying down the law authoritatively, decrying as
sinful all but a very limited allowance of amusements.
</p>

<p>
The results of this policy so long and so thoroughly
tried, are before us. With all this
preaching, the prevalence and variety of amusements
steadily increases. Year after year such
utterances of the pulpit fall with less weight.
Year after year the character and standing of
those who openly set them at defiance renders it
more and more difficult to back them by discipline.
The clergy are not gaining ground with
the youth. Hundreds of the latter, repelled by
this teaching, are tearing themselves away from
the churches of their fathers, to unite with folds
where a more liberal gospel is preached. A
prominent merchant of the Methodist church, a
man whose name is known in both hemispheres,
wrote me, not more than a month ago, <q>the
teachings of my own church on this subject have
had the effect to drive nearly my whole family
into the Protestant Episcopal church.</q>
</p>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<p>
It is sometimes said: <q>Let them go. We
are better without such. We do not want members
who will not relinquish these suspected
amusements. We do not want half way Christians,
conformed to the world, trying to hold fast
to pleasure and secure heaven at the same time.</q>
But such statements do not fairly represent the
case. Again, the whole question is begged.
Many of those who refuse to conform to the
churches dicta on these subjects care nothing
whatever for the amusements in question. The
matter is entirely one of principle. They leave
our churches, not because conscience is relaxed,
but because it is acutely sensitive, and because
they would keep it unsullied. The above method
of putting the case assumes that all the conscience
is on one side; that, while it operates
strongly to condemn, it cannot possibly operate to
approve. Many of these persons resort to other
communions, because they are too honest to compromise
with conscience; because they cannot see
these questions in the light in which their own
churches present them; and rather than go to
God's altars with even an implied falsehood upon
their consciences, or embrace the alternative of
remaining outside of Christ's fold, they will sever
life-long ties, entwined with some of their dearest
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
and tenderest recollections, and go alone with
their conscience and their God to altars where no
such tests are imposed. And in these new associations
they bear themselves with all Christian
fidelity. They bring forth rich fruits of grace.
They walk humbly and consistently with God.
They are exemplary fathers and mothers. They
are liberal in their gifts to the cause of Christ,
and active in promoting schemes to advance it.
Our churches have been driving away such men
and women as these who would have been their
ornaments and bulwarks, because they have
sought unduly to constrain Christian conscience
on these subjects.
</p>

<p>
Worse than this. This course is keeping
youth away from <emph>all</emph> church communions; away
from Christ. Few pastors have not received this
answer, when urging young persons to come to the
Savior. <q>If I become a Christian, I must be very
solemn. I must repress my lightness of heart. I
must relinquish all my cherished enjoyments.</q>
Admit that these views are greatly exaggerated,
as doubtless they are, the question forces itself
upon us, <emph>why do we meet such views so often</emph>?
Why are they so generally prevalent among our
youth? Why does the immense amount of
preaching, forcible, eloquent preaching, on the
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
comforts and joys of a Christian life produce,
seemingly, so little impression upon them?
Why is it that they persist in regarding <emph>Christian</emph>
joy as a sickly, stunted thing, and religion as the
enemy of all light and hilarity and taste and
freedom?
</p>

<p>
Is all this result of native depravity? I cannot
believe it. I cannot dissociate a large measure of
this most lamentable result from the old teaching
and practice of the church on the subject of recreation.
It is of no use to preach to ardent, active
youth, that Christianity is a religion of joy, unless
they see some joy brought out of it besides mere
smiles and a class of recreations which to them as a
class are insipid. To them <emph>Christian</emph> cheerfulness
appeals as being less cheerful than any other kind;
as a sort of mild, repressed gayety, from which
their quick sensibilities and stirring blood revolts.
They feel that in the church they must be cheerful
only in the way the church directs. Those ministers,
they reason, can be very cheerful, and even
laugh uproariously over a discussion on decrees;
but what do I care for decrees? Those elderly
Christians can be cheerful in a quiet conversation
on politics or on the church. But if I want to be
cheerful in a merry dance in proper society and
at proper hours, if I want to go to my friend's
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
billiard table and play a quiet game, if I want
to make merry over a few hits of backgammon,
or give my energy full vent in rolling ten-pins
for an hour, I am a heathen and a publican and
unfit for the society of Christians.
</p>

<p>
As already observed, these views are doubtless
greatly exaggerated by the young. Yet does not
the state of the case warrant us in asking carefully
and prayerfully if there is no connection
between the stringent dogmas of the church on
the subject of recreation, and the general suspicion
of religion which characterizes the mass of
unconverted youth?
</p>

<p>
Be this as it may, the case is narrowed down
to this. Of all the subjects naturally under the
church's supervision, there is not one in which
her influence is less than in this. She neither
represses nor regulates. One of two courses she
must pursue if she would escape the stigma of
impotency. Either she must reassert her old
dogmas, and back them by the severest discipline,
or she must modify them, and openly commit
herself to a larger liberty. Is she prepared for
the first of these courses? Is she prepared, first
of all, to defend it from God's Word. Every
other defense is worthless here. Is she ready
to cut off remorselessly the man or the woman, the
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
youth or the maid who dances, however properly
and modestly? Is she ready to expel or suspend
every minister who shall roll a ten-pin ball, or
while away an hour with chess or backgammon? Is
she ready to lay violent hands upon every member
who fingers a card or handles a cue, or strikes
a croquet ball? If so, I tremble for the results of the
experiment. She will pause before she undertakes
this course. Or will she openly confess to
undue stringency in the past, and write a new
motto upon her banners—<q>More abundant life?</q>
Here what seems a formidable objection is often
preferred with great confidence. Grant that
these more liberal views are correct, still public
sentiment is not yet such as to make it safe to
promulgate them. The argument, both in its
character and result, very strongly resembles that
which used to be such a favorite with the advocates
of slavery. The negro is not fit for freedom. It
recoiled on those who advanced it. Who made
the negro unfit for freedom but those who held
him in bondage until his imbruted nature ceased
to prize or to desire liberty? Similarly I say, if
there is such a state of public sentiment, <emph>why is it
so?</emph> How came this thing there? Who is responsible
for a state of sentiment in the church which
makes it inexpedient to declare the plain teachings
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
of Christ on <emph>any</emph> subject? There can be but one
answer. The responsibility lies between the
church and the world, and the world surely has
not done it. The church herself has made this
sentiment, has created the factitious conscience,
has awakened the morbid sensibility, by preaching
on this subject a theory which shrivels at the
touch of Christ, and which she has clearly shown
her inability to carry into practice. And the
fact that such a sentiment exists, so far from
calling for silence, is the strongest of all reasons
why the church should speak out with a voice of
thunder, and set herself right with the vast mass
of conscience which she so powerfully influences.
</p>

<p>
Would you then, says one, free this matter
entirely from the restraints of the church? By
no means. On the contrary, I am calling upon
the church to regain influence which she has forfeited.
I am pleading for a <emph>regulation</emph> of these
things by the church which does not now exist.
Indulgence is going too far in the church itself.
But from her present stand-point on this question,
the church is, from the very nature of the case,
almost powerless to regulate. Assuming that
the recreations in question are evil and only evil,
she <emph>must not</emph> regulate. That would be compromising.
She must <emph>crush</emph>. Hence the matter resolves
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
itself into a war of extermination on both
sides. Either these forms of amusement must be
exterminated from the church, or they must get
the upper hand of the church's statutes, in which
case the church has no law for them. She has
only provided for destroying them; and failing
in this, must stand and see them run riot in her
very courts.
</p>

<p>
I would not have the church compromise one
hair's-breadth with sin. Better that she should err
in excessive stringency. But I would have her
gain a new vantage ground <emph>by being simply true</emph>,
and not proclaiming unmixed evil, where evil and
good are blended in liberal proportions. By
not undertaking the task of <emph>extermination</emph>, where
her duty is that of <emph>discrimination</emph>. The moment
she begins upon the principle of <emph>analyzing</emph> these
mixed elements, casting only the bad away, and
using, developing and enjoying the good, that
moment she mounts to a point from which she
can regulate <emph>any</emph> matter which falls under her
jurisdiction. And to be thus true, she must go
direct to Christ. His word and example are conclusive,
and we may safely preach what we find
there. Do we find any such principle of repression
as the church has preached for years past?
No; we find abuse condemned, and use allowed
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
and approved. The Savior is at the hilarious
merry-making of the marriage, contributing to
the festivity. His own parable is on record,
bidding men put the gospel into all the forms and
developments of life, to refine and fit them for
human enjoyment. The long list of exceptions
with which men are forbidden to bring the gospel
leaven into contact has been added by men, not
by Christ. He was condemned for the very same
reason for which hundreds condemn a so called
liberal Christian to-day; because he used the world
which other men used, and thought it not necessary
to abstain from use because others abused.
These teachings are there if anything is there.
They are for all time. The conditions of no age
can justify Christians in refusing to preach and
to apply them just as they stand. Nine-tenths of
the really sinful indulgence over which the church
is mourning to-day, is simply because of the
failure to do this faithfully. Because good men
have been startled by the magnitude and power
of evil, and have been too timid to meet it with
methods which seemed so slow, and which even
gave room for the charge of compromise. In
being wiser than her Lord, the church has drawn
the reins too tightly, and the results speak for
themselves. Much is said about expediency; and
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
Paul's words about meat offending his brother,
have been saddled with more burdens than any
ten other passages of scripture; but after all, the
result proves simply this, that it is always most
expedient to follow Christ implicitly.
</p>

<p>
I would, moreover, that the church in dealing
with this question, would consent to meddle less
with its details, and leave them more where they
properly belong, with the individual conscience.
No one man can decide these things for another.
No man has a right to insist that his standard of
expediency shall be his brother's. Where God's
law is explicit, both are bound alike. When it
throws a decision upon conscience, neither has a
right to complain if the paths diverge. Both
paths may not be right, but to his own Master
shall each traveler stand or fall.
</p>

<p>
The church, indeed, can do better than to busy
herself with such details, or, to speak more correctly,
she can deal with them much more successfully
by shifting her point of power from the
circumference to the centre. Her duty in this
case will be very much simplified and lightened,
if she will give more attention to the <emph>springs</emph>
of Christian life, to the conformity of the <emph>heart</emph>
to the mind and will of Christ, to fostering an
enthusiastic devotion to him. Then these details
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
and distinctions will mostly take care of themselves.
The church has lacked faith in the
regulative power of this principle, and has sought
to supply its assumed defects by innumerable
special provisions; and the consequent tendency
of this course has been to fetter Christian individuality,
and to insist that love to Christ should
express itself only in such modes as the church
might prescribe. Hence the sentiment often
expressed, a true Christian will have no taste for
these things. But here again the whole question
is begged. You do not know, you cannot know
what affinities a Christian life may develop. All
that you can with any confidence assert is the
general fact that he will love all that is good, acceptable,
perfect, and hate all that is essentially evil.
As to other matters, things whose moral value
arises entirely from circumstances, a love to Christ
as sincere and as ardent as yours, may lead him
in a direction the very opposite of yours. Therefore
it will be more in the interest of a true
Christian individuality, of a higher and more
generous Christian manhood, for the church to
throw the soul more on its love to Christ as the
great regulative principle. Let her probe the
hearts committed to her, deeply for this. Let
her strengthen this sentiment by every possible
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
safeguard. Let her urge her members earnestly
to higher attainments in this, and her difficulties
in the regulation of the amusement question, and
of every similar question will, in a great degree,
disappear. Her courts will be full of the richest
developments of grace, the most varied activities,
the most glorious examples of that wondrous
unity in diversity which Christianity alone displays.
</p>

<p>
Might not the church, moreover, profitably ask
herself if there be not a positive duty toward
these much abused things, as well as a privilege
of letting them alone? If a thing has good in it,
does Christ teach that our duty to it is discharged
in letting it alone for the sake of the evil mixed
with it? That is the easier way, I know. It is a
good deal easier to throw overboard good and
evil together, than to separate them carefully and
to develop the good into a power. But if easier,
is it better? I cannot avoid quoting just here
the exquisite words of Trench on the Marriage
at Cana, as bringing out clearly our Savior's example
on this point: <q>We need not wonder to
find the Lord of life at that festival; for he came
to sanctify all life, its times of joy, as its times of
sorrow; <emph>and all experience tells us that it is times of
gladness, such as this was now, which especially need
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
such a sanctifying power, such a presence of the Lord</emph>.
In times of sorrow the sense of God's presence
comes most naturally out; in these it is in
danger to be forgotten. He was there, and by
his presence struck the key-note to the whole
future tenor of his ministry. He should not be
as another Baptist, to withdraw himself from the
common paths of men, a preacher in the wilderness;
but his should be at once a harder and a
higher task, to mingle with and purify the common
life of men, to witness for and bring out the
glory which was hidden in its every relation.</q>
To the same purpose are the pertinent words of
Alford: <q>To endeavor to evade the work which
he has appointed for each man, by refusing the
bounty to save the trouble of seeking the grace,
is an attempt which must ever end in degradation
of the individual motives and in social demoralization,
whatever present apparent effects may
follow its first promulgation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A terrible responsibility you are taking on
yourself,</q> say some to the writer. <q>Youth are
going to perdition on your authority, pleading
your word and example as a Christian minister.</q>
I have only to say I fear not to meet such before
the highest of all tribunals. If any man shall,
after carefully reading these four discourses, say
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
that they give his worldly heart full license to
indulge its will, I tell him to his face, he is
either a fool or a hypocrite. Not proudly, I
trust, but in humble reliance upon him for
whose sake every line has been penned, I bow
my shoulders to every morsel of responsibility
which the utterance of these truths involves. No
youth will go to perdition on their authority.
If he shall infer the right to abuse from a plea
for moderate Christian use, his perdition be on
his own head. The truth I have uttered shall
condemn him. If I err, God will bring this thing
to nought: and I, who have erred in good faith,
and with an honest conscience, shall be dealt with
by a tender Savior as lovingly and leniently as I
believe he will deal with those who, with equal
sincerity and zeal, may possibly have erred in so
presenting to youth a gospel of light and joy
and freedom, as to make some of them prefer
the risk of perdition to embracing it.
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
